introduction Q


Technology = Recipes



The ingredients for bread were always the same: flour, yeast, water, and salt. But the difficulty was that there were ten thousand ways of combining these simple elements. Every little detail was important, we learned: the freshness of the yeast, the type of flour, the time of rising, the way one kneaded the dough, the amount of heat and moisture in the oven, even the weather.

— Julia Child, My Life in France, 2006



the code economy describes the evolution of human productive activity from simplicity to complexity over the span of more than 40,000 years. I call this evolutionary process the advance of code.

Our modern conception of code— programs run on digital computers— is just the latest incarnation; code is in fact much older. How, one might ask, have we humans managed to get where we are today despite our abundant failings, including wars, famines, and a demonstrably meager capacity for society- wide planning and coordina-tion? We have survived, and thrived, by developing productive activities that evolve into regular routines and standardized platforms— which is to say we have survived, and thrived, by creating and advancing code.

How is this process evolutionary? In the economy, raw materials are like diatoms, amoebas, or plankton in the biological food chain, whereas standardized platforms are like complex multicellular organ-isms. As code advances, higher- level technologies feed on more funda-mental technologies in much the same way more complex organisms



1

2



2 The Code Economy

feed on simpler organisms in the food chain. Platforms provide essen-tial structures for the code economy: The infrastructure that underlies a city is a standardized platform. Written language is a standardized platform. The Internet is a standardized platform.

Human civilization has thus advanced through the creation and im-provement of code, which is built on layers of platforms that accumu-late like the pipes and tunnels that lie below a great city.

The microeconomics you learned in college was generally limited to the “what” of production: what goes in and what comes out. This book is about the “how”: how inputs are combined to yield outputs. In other words, it is about how ideas become things.

Here’s an example.

You are baking chocolate chip cookies. You have arrayed before you the required ingredients: 1 cup of butter, 1 cup of white sugar, 1 cup of brown sugar, 2 eggs, 1 teaspoon of baking soda, 2 teaspoons of hot water, 1/ 2 teaspoon of salt, and (importantly) 2 cups of chocolate chips. These items, 30 minutes of your own labor, and access to the oven, bowls, and other durable equipment you employ constitute the inputs into your production process. The work will yield 24 servings of two cookies each, which constitute your output.

From the perspective of standard microeconomic theory, we have fully described the production of chocolate chip cookies: capital, labor, and raw material inputs combine to yield an output. However, as is obvious to even the least experienced baker, simply listing ingre-dients and stating the output does not constitute a complete recipe. Something important is missing: the directions— how you make the cookies.

The “how” goes by many names: recipes, processes, routines, algo-rithms, and programs, among others. While I will employ each of these names at different points in this book, I use the word “code” through-out to refer to the how of production.

The essential idea is that the “what” of output cannot exist without the “how” by which it is produced. In other words, production is not possible without process. These processes evolve according to both their own logic and the path of human decision- making. This has always been true: the economy has always been at least as much about the

3



Introduction 3

evolution of code as about the choice of inputs and the consumption of output. Code economics is as old as the first recipe and the earliest systematically produced tool, and it is as integral to the unfolding of human history as every king, queen, general, prime minister, and pres-ident combined.

We cannot understand the dynamics of the economy— its past or its future— without understanding code.

The word “code” derives from the Latin codex, meaning “a system of laws.” Today code is used in various distinct contexts— computer code, genetic code, cryptologic code (i.e., ciphers such as Morse code), eth-ical code, building code, and so forth— each of which has a common feature: it contains instructions that require a process in order to reach its intended end. Computer code requires the action of a compiler, energy, and (usually) inputs in order to become a useful program. Genetic code requires expression through the selective action of en-zymes to produce proteins or RNA, ultimately producing a unique phenotype. Cryptologic code requires decryption in order to be con-verted into a usable message. Ethical codes, legal codes, and building codes all require processes of interpretation in order to be converted into action.

Code can include instructions we follow consciously and purposively, and those we follow unconsciously and intuitively. Code can be under-stood tacitly, it can be written, or it can be embedded in hardware.1 Code can be stored, transmitted, received, and modified. Code captures the algorithmic nature of instructions as well as their evolutionary character.

As you read this book, you will see that code as I intend it incorpo-rates elements of computer code, genetic code, cryptologic code, and other forms as well. But you will also see that it stands alone as its own concept— the instructions and algorithms that guide production in the economy— for which no adequate word yet exists.

To convey the intuitive meaning of the concept I intend to com-municate with the word “code,” as well as its breadth, I use two spe-cific and carefully selected words interchangeably with code: recipe and technology.

My motivation for using “recipe” is evident from the chocolate chip cookie example I gave above. However, I do not intend the culinary

4



4 The Code Economy

recipe to be only a metaphor for the how of production; the recipe is, rather, the most literal and direct example of code as I use the word. There has been code in production since the first time a human being prepared food. Indeed, if we restrict “production” to mean the preparation of food for consumption, we can start by imagining every single meal consumed by the roughly one hundred billion people who have lived since we human beings cooked our first meal about 400,000 years ago: approx-imately four quadrillion prepared meals have been consumed through-out human history. Each of those meals was in fact (not in theory) as-sociated with some method by which the meal was produced— which is to say, the code for producing that meal. For most of the first 400,000 years that humans prepared meals we were not a numerous species and the code we used to prepare meals was relatively rudimentary. Therefore, the early volumes of an imaginary “Global Compendium of All Recipes” dedicated to prehistory would be quite slim. However, in the past two millennia, and particularly in the past two hundred years, both the size of the human population and the complexity of our culinary prepara-tions have taken off. As a result, the size of the volumes in our “Global Compendium” would have grown exponentially.

Let’s now go beyond the preparation of meals to consider the code involved in every good or service we humans have ever produced, for our own use or for exchange, from the earliest obsidian spear point to the most recent smartphone. When I talk about the evolution of code, I am referring to the contents of the global compendium containing all of those production recipes. They are numerous.

This brings me to the second word I use interchangeably with code: technology. If we have technological gizmos in mind, then the leap from recipes to technology seems big. However, the leap seems smaller if we consider the Greek origin of the word “technology.” The first half derives from techné (τέχνη), which signifies “art, craft, or trade.” The second half derives from the word logos (λόγος), which signifies an “ordered account” or “reasoned discourse.”2 Thus technology literally means “an ordered account of art, craft, or trade”— in other words, broadly speaking, a recipe.

Substantial anthropological research suggests that culinary recipes were the earliest and among the most transformative technologies em-ployed by humans. We have understood for some time that cooking

5



Introduction 5

accelerated human evolution by substantially increasing the nutrients absorbed in the stomach and small intestine.3 However, recent research suggests that human ancestors were using recipes to prepare food to dra-matic effect as early as two million years ago— even before we learned to control fire and began cooking, which occurred about 400,000 years ago. Simply slicing meats and pounding tubers (such as yams), as was done by our earliest ancestors, turns out to yield digestive advantages that are comparable to those realized by cooking.4 Cooked or raw, in-creased nutrient intake enabled us to evolve smaller teeth and chewing muscles and even a smaller gut than our ancestors or primate cousins. These evolutionary adaptations in turn supported the development of humans’ larger, energy- hungry brain.

The first recipes— code at work— literally made humans what we are today.

Fast forward to the present, where much of the latest research seems to suggest that the advance of code is no longer a boon to human well- being but, rather, a threat.

In the past two decades in particular, a proliferation of published works has warned of the deeply adverse social impact we can expect from the continued advance of code. Futurist Jeremy Rifkin’s 1995 book, The End of Work: The Decline of the Global Labor Force and the Dawn of the Post- Market Era, set forth one position in what might be termed “The Great Man- vs- Machine Debate.” Rifkin argues that we should be deeply con-cerned about the prospect of a world without jobs, as machines empow-ered by code continue their advance. “We are entering into a new period in history— one in which machines increasingly replace human beings in the process of making and moving goods and providing services,” he cau-tions.5 “A near- workerless world is fast approaching.”6 Others who have advanced more nuanced forms of the same basic argument include Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew McAfee, Tyler Cowen, and Martin Ford. From an economic standpoint, their argument is straightforward:

1. The power of code is growing at an exponential rate. 2. Code nearly perfectly substitutes for human capabilities. 3. Therefore the (relative) power of human capabilities is shrinking

at an exponential rate.

6



6 The Code Economy

If Rifkin and others are correct, we should be deeply worried about the impending adverse consequences of the advance of code.

In sharp contrast, Ray Kurzweil argues in his 2005 bestseller, The Singularity Is Near: When Humans Transcend Biology, that the exponen-tially increasing power of code— particularly, although not exclusively, digital computing— will trigger an epochal discontinuity in the human experience. From an economic standpoint, Kurzweil’s argument is comparably direct:

1. The power of code is growing at an exponential rate. 2. Code nearly perfectly complements human capabilities. 3. Therefore the (absolute) power of human capabilities is growing

at an exponential rate.

Like many others, Kurzweil argues that “only technology can provide the scale to overcome the challenges with which human society has struggled for generations.”7 However, he goes further, tracing the arc of code- enabled progress into the immediate future to sketch the outlines of what he calls “The Singularity,” which “will result from the merger of the vast knowledge embedded in our brains with the vastly greater capacity, speed, and knowledge- sharing ability of our technology, [en-abling] our human- machine civilization to transcend the human brain’s limitations of a mere hundred trillion extremely slow connections.”8 When it comes to algorithmically empowered robots taking our jobs, Kurzweil’s prescription is simple: if you can’t beat ’em, join ’em— maybe even literally, in cyborg fashion.

The Great Man- vs- Machine Debate is not new, of course. Over the past four centuries it has engaged some of the greatest minds in the history of ideas: Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, David Ricardo, Ada Lovelace, John Maynard Keynes, Norbert Weiner, and Herbert Simon are notable among them. (I will offer more about these pioneers of code economics— none of them, with the possible exception of Keynes, household names today— as the book proceeds.) However, over the past hundred years at least, the dynamics of the debate have settled into a fairly straightforward rhythm: One side cites historical evidence to demonstrate that technology- enabled disruptions in the past have always ended up boosting both employment and output so we have

7



Introduction 7

little to fear about the future. The other side counters with some variant of “This time it is different,” and thus deep concern about the adverse consequences of the advance of code is warranted.

As the Great Man- vs- Machine Debate raged in the 1930s, it involved not just Keynes but other greats of the economics profession, including Joseph Schumpeter, John Hicks, and Paul Douglas. It surged again in the 1950s and 1960s, prompting scores of congressional hearings and the appointment of multiple presidential commissions. And it is raging again today, prompted by a combination of macroeconomic circum-stances (concern over the stagnation of wages in particular, which goes back decades) and new scholarship.9 Each time the debate has recurred, the same intellectual contest has taken place: “History proves we’ll be fine” versus “This time is different.”

So which is it to be for humanity? Kurzweil’s bright Singularity or Rifkin’s dystopian World without Work? Without pretending to be able to predict the future but extrapolating from trends that go back for centuries, if not millennia, I argue in this book that a third line of argument is possible:

1. The power of code is growing at an exponential rate. 2. Code only partially substitutes for human capabilities. 3. Therefore the (relative) power of human capabilities is shrinking

at an exponential rate in those categories of work that can be performed by computers, but not in others.

In other words, where Kurzweil talks about an impending code- induced Singularity, the reality looks much more like one code- induced bifurcation— the division of labor between humans and machines— after another.

The answer to the question, “Is there anything that humans can do better than digital computers?” turns out to be fairly simple: humans are better at being human.

the three main ideas of the book are as follows:

1. Creating and improving code is a key part of what we human

beings do. It’s how we invent the future by building on the past.

8



8 The Code Economy

2. The evolution of the economy is driven by the advance of

code. Understanding this advance is therefore fundamental to economics, and to much of human history.

3. When we create and advance code we don’t just invent new

toys, we produce new forms of meaning, new experiences, and new ways of making our way in the world.

In advancing these three ideas, I am seeking to address an imbalance in the way economics is broadly understood and taught. Economics as conveyed in undergraduate courses and popular accounts tends to focus on choice and consumption, to the neglect of code and produc-tion.10 Choice and consumption are of course important dimensions of economic experience, but so are code and production. After all, we humans are producers at least as much as we are consumers.

The book is organized as follows. In Part One, “The Advance of Code,” I describe the origin of code, beginning with the production of obsidian axes and continuing through the development of writing, the emergence of culinary recipes, and the evolution of cities. I then set up the discussion relating to the Great Man- vs- Machine Debate that appears later in the book by describing how the “job,” as it is currently understood, is a recent historical creation— one that rests on layers of institutions that have taken millennia to accumulate. I conclude Part One by describing the history of digital computing as the latest chapter in the evolution of code, emphasizing the profound impact it has had, and is having, on the structure of institutions and thus on the defini-tion of jobs.

In Part Two, “Code Economics,” I shift to describing the deep but today largely ignored history of inquiry in the field of economics that is focused on code and production. I convey this history via the three core mechanisms for the advance of code: learning, evolution, and the lay-ering of complexity through the development of platforms. This story begins with economists’ first attempts to understand the net impact mechanization had on human society during the Industrial Revolution. As the processes of production and the structure of the economy both became more complex in the early twentieth century, social scientists began to study how firms learn and develop. This inquiry developed into the fields of operations research and management science. Still

9



Introduction 9

later, economists came to appreciate how the encoding of widely agreed upon practices into standardized platforms supports the evolution of economic activity from simplicity toward complexity.

In Part Three, “The Human Advantage,” I explore the relationship between the advance of code and the human experience. This part of the book directly addresses the contention that the continued advance of code will adversely impact human well- being— either overall or by exacerbating social inequality. Referring to a historical record spanning centuries, I argue that the advance of code has consistently tended to humanize work and, in so doing, to generate broadly shared benefits.

Of course, that the advance of code will continue to generate broadly shared benefits is hardly assured. There are things we can and must do to ensure that the future impacts of the advance of code are as advanta-geous as they have been in the past. The good news is that we’ve been adapting to, and benefiting from, the advance of code for more than 40,000 years. By understanding the momentum of history we can use it in our favor.



10



11





Part one




the advance of code Q



12



Q 1

Jobs

Divide and Coordinate



There is scarcely anything of greater moment in the economy of a nation than the proper division of labor.

— Alexander Hamilton, Report on the Subject of Manufactures, 1791



Life was simpler in the Stone Age.

Consider production. By examining the characteristics of archeologi-cal finds such as stone tools, skeletal remains, and other physical arti-facts,1 anthropologists are able to trace the increasing complexity of the tasks performed by humans over the millennia of our existence. The earli-est hominins had about the same short- term memory as a modern- day chimpanzee, which is to say that they could keep track of only two opera-tions at a time.2 Fortunately for us humans, we got better. From the first use of found objects as tools roughly 2.5 million years ago (please refer to the opening sequence of 2001: A Space Odyssey), humans progressed to creating tools and then to deliberately improving those tools for spe-cific purposes. Our methods for creating tools gradually became more sophisticated, until we were using the tools we created to produce other tools in a repetitive and predictable manner. These processes for creating stone tools were among humanity’s first production algorithms—that is, the earliest code (see figure 1.1).3 They appeared almost simultaneously in human communities in most parts of the world around 40,000 BCE.4

“Humans, too, probably began using stones to hammer,” economist James Bessen writes in his book Learning by Doing: The Real Connection between Innovation, Wages, and Wealth, “but by the Neolithic period,

13

14





FIGURE 1.1 Demands on Short- Term Working Memory in the Production of an Obsidian Axe. This figure and accompanying caption from Read and van der Leeuw (2015) relate the code employed in the production of an obsidian axe to the cognitive capacity required to execute that code: “Short- term memory refers to the ability to hold a small amount of information in an active, available state for a short period of time. The size of short- term memory affects the number of different sources, kinds, or bits of information that can be held and processed together simultaneously in working memory when carrying out a particular train of thought or course of action. We can relate the concepts invoked in the production of stone tools to the number

15



Jobs 15

they had developed scores of different stone tools— axes, adzes, chisels, arrowheads, burins, and other types— each optimized to solve a specific problem. Moreover, they made these tools using optimized production techniques— stone knapping techniques that archaeology graduate stu-dents have a hard time mastering after a semester of trial and error … What really distinguished the early humans from other species was not conceiving technology ideas, but perfecting those ideas to deal with the complex natural environment.”5

By the Neolithic period, humans had developed the ability to keep seven or eight operations in mind simultaneously.6 Believe it or not, that’s pretty much as far as we got in terms of individual cognitive capacity. As a rule, humans today can do no better than our Neolithic ancestors.7 However, whereas individual human cognitive ability seems to have plateaued roughly around 40,000 BCE, the progress of human social development began to accelerate dramatically. Why?

We invented society.

Rather than continue to evolve our capacity to perform tasks indi-vidually, we humans began to develop something that turned out to be even more powerful: our capacity to solve tasks in groups.8 As biologist E. O. Wilson put it in his recent book, The Social Conquest of Earth:

During this critical period of human prehistory, 60,000 to

50,000 years ago, the growth of cultures … was slow, then faster

and still faster and yet again faster, in the manner of chemical and



of dimensions involved and thereby to the size of short- term working memory (STWM) required for the production of the kind of stone tools that exemplify each stage in hominin evolution. For humans to attain the capacity to conceive of a three- dimensional object (a pebble or stone tool) in three dimensions takes around 2 million years. (a) Taking a flake off at the tip of the pebble is an action in 0 dimensions, and takes short- term working memory 3; (b) successively taking off several adjacent flakes creates a (1- dimensional) line, and requires STWM 4; (c) stretching the line until it meets itself defines a surface by drawing a line around it and represents STWM 4.5; distinguishing between that line and the surface it encloses implies fully working in two dimensions, and requires STWM 5; (d) preparing two sides in order to remove the flakes from the third side testifies to a three- dimensional conceptualization of the pebble, and requires STWM 7.” Source: Read and van der Leeuw (2015), van der Leeuw (2000). Reprinted with permission of the author.

16



16 The Advance of Code

biological autocatalysis. The reason is that the adoption of any one

innovation made adoption of certain others possible, which then, if

useful, were more likely to spread. Bands and communities of bands

with better combinations of cultural innovations became more pro-

ductive and better equipped for competition and war. Their rivals

either copied them or else were displaced and their territories taken.

Thus group selection drove the evolution of culture.9

Clan groups— and, over time, clusters of clan groups— used initial ad-vances in code as building blocks that they combined into further ad-vances in code.

By about 10,000 BCE, humans had formed the first villages, which anthropologist Sander van der Leeuw characterizes as “aggregate clus-ters that solved the most frequently encountered of life’s challenges.”10 Villages were the precursors of modern- day business firms in that they were durable associations built around routines.11 As the influential nineteenth- century economist Herbert Spencer noted over a hundred and fifty years ago, the advance of code at the village level through the creation of new technological combinations set into motion the evo-lution from simplicity to complexity that has resulted in the modern economy (see Text Box 1.1).

It was in the village, then, that code began to evolve.

Granted, if assessed in terms of the lived experience of most human beings, the evolution of code got off to a slow start. As Thomas Hobbes put it in his 1689 masterwork, Leviathan, life for most of history until that point was not only “nasty, brutish, and short,” but also, and more to the point, “men lived on Gross Experience. There was no method; that is to say, no sowing nor planting of knowledge by itself, apart from the weeds and common plants of error and conjecture.”12

The first recorded use of the word “job” in the sense of work done for pay is reported by the Oxford English Dictionary to have occurred in 1557, a little more than a century before Hobbes wrote Leviathan. In Documents Relating to the Revels at Court in the Time of King Edward VI and Queen Mary, Albert Feuillerat employs the phrase “jobbe of work” to signify a piece of work.13 This usage likely stems from the word “gobbe,” which (then as today) signifies a mass or a lump.

17



Jobs 17



Text Box 1.1 Herbert Spencer and the Progression from Simplicity

to Complexity

From the time Charles Darwin’s The Origin of Species (1859) was

published until at least the start of World War I, and possibly

beyond, the theory of evolution was the Great Idea that drove intel-

lectual discourse. The social theorist of greatest fame during that era

was not Adam Smith or David Ricardo but Herbert Spencer, the first

code economist.14

Spencer was a towering intellectual figure whose fame rose as quickly

as it fell. Among his claims to celebrity is having coined the expres-

sion “survival of the fittest.” His project was nothing less than a unified

theory of the physical and natural sciences. His thesis, developed in

a hugely influential 1857 essay titled “Progress: Its Law and Cause,”

was simple: “Whether it be in the development of the Earth, in the

development of Life upon its surface, in the development of Society, of

Government, of Manufactures, of Commerce, of Language, Literature,

Science, Art, this same evolution of the simple into the complex,

through successive differentiations, holds throughout” (p. 3).

According to Herbert Spencer, what set in motion the process

of differentiation that led to the complexity of a modern economy

was the uneven distribution of talents within the populations of the

earliest villages:

Where there grows up a fixed and multiplying community, these differentiations [among people] become permanent, and increase with each generation. A larger population, involving a greater demand for every commodity, intensifies the functional activity of each specialized person or class; and this renders the specialization more definite where it already exists, and estab-lishes it where it is nascent. (p. 52)

Rather than putting unmanageable pressure on a finite resource

base, as the Reverend Thomas Malthus had famously argued, grow-

ing populations in prospering villages prompted increased specializa-

tion, which in term prompted a greater capacity to produce.

18



18 The Advance of Code



As prehistoric villages developed further, Spencer reasoned, a new

phenomenon arose: competition among producers. Competition

prompted workers to seek new methods and materials actively.

The creation of particularly successful new methods resulted in the

advent of new occupations:

Competing workers, ever aiming to produce improved ar-ticles, occasionally discover better processes or raw materials. In weapons and cutting tools, the substitution of bronze for stone entails upon him who first makes it a great increase of demand— so great an increase that he presently finds all his time occupied in making the bronze for the articles he sells, and is obliged to depute the fashioning of these to others: and, eventually, the making of bronze, thus gradually differentiated from a pre- existing occupation, becomes an occupation by itself. (p. 52)

The creation of one new occupation prompted a sequence of further

differentiations in the economy:

But now mark the ramified changes which follow this change. Bronze soon replaces stone, not only in the articles it was first used for, but in many others— in arms, tools, and utensils of various kinds; and so affects the manufacture of these things. Further, it affects the processes which these utensils subserve, and the resulting products— modifies buildings, carvings, dress, personal decorations. Yet again, it sets going sundry manufactures which were before impossible, from lack of a material fit for the requisite tools. And all these changes react on the people— increase their manipulative skill, their intel-ligence, their comfort— refine their habits and tastes. (p. 53)

Advancing directly from prehistory to the technological innova-

tions of the mid- nineteenth century (that is, the time of his writing),

Spencer went on to detail exhaustively the cascading sequence of

economic differentiations induced by the introduction of the railway.

19



Jobs 19



With each introduction of a fundamentally new technology and its

associated occupations, the outcome as he saw it was the same:

The social organism has been rendered more heterogeneous in virtue of the many new occupations introduced, and the many old ones further specialized; prices in every place have been altered; each trader has, more or less, modified his way of doing business; and almost every person has been affected in his ac-tions, thoughts, emotions. (p. 55)



Etymologically speaking, then, the “job” was originally a lump.

The advent of the “jobbe” as a lump of work was to the evolution of modern society something like what the first single- celled organism was to the evolution of life. The “jobbe” contrasted with the obligation to perform labor continuously and without clearly defined roles— slavery, serfdom, indentured servitude, or even apprenticeship— as had been the norm through human history.

In the medieval European world, work was an obligation subject to enforcement by feudal lords; jobs and unemployment as we under-stand them today did not yet exist. As the great Austrian economist Joseph Schumpeter notes in his vast History of Economic Analysis, “In principle, medieval society provided a berth for everyone whom it rec-ognized as a member: its structural design excluded unemployment and destitution … In normal times unemployment was quantitatively unimportant and confined to individuals who had broken loose from their environment or had been cast off by it and who in consequence had become beggars, vagrants, and highwaymen.” As a result, “mass unemployment, definitely unconnected with any personal shortcom-ings of the unemployed, was unknown to the Middle Ages except as a consequence of social catastrophes such as devastation by wars, feuds, and plagues.”15

When, in the aftermath of the bubonic plague, labor suddenly was in short supply, European monarchs responded by placing restrictions on the mobility of workers. The Ordinance of Labourers, issued by King Edward III of England on June 18, 1349, included the following

20



20 The Advance of Code

mandate: “Every man or woman, free or unfree, aged sixty years or younger and without land or a craft sufficient for self- support, must serve whoever required his labour. Furthermore, the wages of servants, labour-ers, and artisans must be no higher than had been customary in a given locality in 1346 or common years thereabouts.”16 Parliament subsequently passed the Statute of Laborers, which was intended to address the ongo-ing “malice of servants, who were idle and refused to serve after the pes-tilence.” Whereas the Ordinance had set only vague limits on wages, the Statute went further, specifying specific rates for a range of occupations on the basis of piecework or a day’s work. While intended to constrain workers’ ability to negotiate higher pay with their baronial employers, these statutes in effect affirmed the existence of a labor market. In its way, then, the Black Death helped to institutionalize wage work.

While medieval workers were subject to the whims of monarchi-cal authority when it came to the imposition of wage controls, in an-other sense they had a great deal more autonomy than most workers today. Although they may have belonged to guilds that set guidelines for the “how” of production, the medieval baker, blacksmith, and mil-liner were masters of their own trade. The guilds acted at a distance, so although medieval artisans may have been circumscribed by tradi-tion and culture, they did not have to conform to any manual or set of standard operating procedures, follow prescribed recipes, or endure having anything like a “boss” looking over their shoulders at work.

The job as we know it today is a relatively recent product of the coevo-lution of code and work, which in turn began when humans perfected specialization.

Plato wrote in The Republic circa 360 BCE, “All things are produced more plentifully and easily and of a better quality when one man does one thing which is natural to him and does it at the right time, and leaves other things.” Human workers therefore initially specialized in trades, which were defined at the individual level and naturally evolved into institutions defined around specific social needs: bakeries, smith-ies, taverns, and the like. Change was so slow in early society relative to the human lifespan that people came to be named for their occupa-tions: Baker, Barker, Cooper, Cramer, Eisenhower (which means “iron worker”), Shoemaker, Smith, Tyler, Wagner, Wright, and many more.

21



Jobs 21

All these occupations became family names that have been passed on through the generations as enduring markers of past societal stasis.

These institutions became more complex over the centuries as “labor” was broken down into more specific tasks.17 Famously using a pin factory as an example, Adam Smith opens The Wealth of Nations by highlighting the benefits of specialization by task: “The greatest im-provement in the productive powers of labour, and the greater part of the skill, dexterity, and judgment with which it is any where directed, or applied, seem to have been the effects of the division of labour.”18 Fifteen years later, Alexander Hamilton stressed the importance of the division of labor in the Report on Manufacturers, which was a major salvo in his debate with Thomas Jefferson over the relative value of manufacturing versus agriculture to the economic future of the newly founded United States of America. As quoted at the start of this chap-ter, Hamilton wrote that “there is scarcely anything of greater moment in the economy of a nation than the proper division of labor.”19

In the past two hundred years, the complexity of human economic organization has increased by orders of magnitude. Death rates began to fall rapidly in the middle of the nineteenth century, due to a com-bination of increased agricultural output, improved hygiene, and the beginning of better medical practices— all different dimensions of the advance of code. Accordingly, the population grew. As newly invented machines and improved practices (again, read “code”) reduced the need for manual labor in agriculture, urbanization rapidly intensified and humanity’s cognitive surplus increased. Greater numbers of people living in greater density than ever before accelerated the advance of code.20

By the twentieth century, the continued advance of code necessi-tated the creation of government bureaucracies and large corporations that employed vast numbers of people. These organizations executed code of sufficient complexity that it was beyond the capacity of any single individual to master. To structure work within such large, com-plex organizations, humans began to define occupations in terms of specific task- defined roles rather than by artisanal trades, as had been the case throughout human history. We came to call these task- defined roles “jobs.” Jobs were very different from the trades, in that they were designed to optimize institutional operations rather than to perpetuate

22



22 The Advance of Code

and advance inherited, mostly unwritten production practices. In this way, the artisans, serfs, and merchants who defined the medieval agrar-ian economy were replaced by an industrial economic order dominated by workers who executed the subroutines of complex algorithms per-formed by large corporate entities. Thus the “Organization Man” came into existence.

Two broad categories of epochal change occurred as a result of the evolution of the economy from simplicity to complexity, which I refer to as the advance of code.

One is that our capabilities grew, individually and collectively. For instance, we can now fly. (I am encoding these very words while moving far above the clouds at a speed many times faster than the fast-est chariot, employing a highly evolved abacus known as a computer, whose history and operation I will describe later in the book. This is an impressive achievement.) We can carry on conversations with people anywhere around the world. By consuming small quantities of a serum made from mold we can defeat microscopic “armies” that attack our bodies. We can use eggs to make a delicious sauce known as mayon-naise (see chapter seven). But that’s not all.

The second epochal change related to the advance of code is that we have, to an increasing degree, ceded to other people— and to code itself— authority and autonomy, which for millennia we had kept unto ourselves and our immediate tribal groups as uncodified cultural norms. We now obey written laws and rules. We follow instructions. We respect elected officials (in our actions if not always our thoughts) and the elected officials respect electoral processes (in their thoughts if not always their actions). We do our jobs. We no longer have our own wells or, in most cases, our own gardens. Most of us (myself included) have forgotten how to hunt. We depend for our survival on an ever- growing array of services provided by others, who in turn are ceding an increasing amount of their authority to code.21

We are at once increasingly empowered and increasingly disempow-ered, increasingly vulnerable and increasingly omnipotent— all due to the advance of code.

The effects of the advance of code reflect this duality. In the aggre-gate, the advance of code over the millennia has had some astonishingly positive consequences: Our largest villages sustain far more people

23



Jobs 23

today than were alive on the entire planet 40,000 years ago. We call these largest villages “cities.” Babies born today nearly anywhere in the world can expect to live twice as long as babies born in the same places only two hundred years ago. At any time and in almost any place, we have access to vast libraries of accumulated knowledge and powers of computation many orders of magnitude greater than those possessed by the totality of humanity a century ago— and all are literally accessible in the palms of our hands.

The advance of code has also had negative consequences. Perhaps most significant is that we fall well short of fully expressing our hu-manity through code. When code overrides morality— “I was just fol-lowing orders”— terrible consequences can result. Furthermore, the operation of code does not necessarily, or in all places, lead to more equitable outcomes than its predecessor in the organization of human society— brute force. In the code economy, those who author, store, and enforce code by definition have more power than those who ex-ecute code; those who execute code in turn generally fare better than those who are excluded from code. For this reason, people who have the opportunity and the capacity to keep up with the advance of code have a greater opportunity to create and contribute to society than those who do not.22

For better and for worse, humanity and code are coevolving. What we call “the economy” necessarily encompasses both.

While Hobbes may have underestimated the power of oral tradi-tions to store and convey code, it is true that human societies did not develop methods to create and assess code systematically until the Age of Enlightenment in Europe. Long after the advent of villages, human communities remained relatively small and sparsely distributed, which meant there were few people around to try out new ways of doing things and few opportunities to share those new methods. And although writ-ing was invented more than five thousand years ago, a majority of the world’s people have been literate only for the past century.

As a consequence, code advanced slowly. For 14,000 years after the first villages formed, the human lifespan barely budged and the global population grew at a glacial pace: from the first century BCE to the late eighteenth century, both economic and population growth rates were well below 0.1 percent per year.

24



24 The Advance of Code

Perhaps counterintuitively, these millennia of relative stasis in the human experience produced many of humanity’s greatest cre-ations: writing, decimal numbers, algebra, water mills, the astrolabe, eyeglasses, mechanical clocks, the printing press, multimasted ships, and bills of exchange, to name but a few. Each of these advances in technology was accompanied by an advance in code, the evolution of which progressively expanded human capabilities. These advances also set the stage for the rapid improvement in the human condition that we have seen over the past two centuries.

In the next chapter I focus on two human creations that arguably have advanced human development more than any others: writing and cities.



Q 2

Code

“This Is the Procedure”



Civilization advances by extending the number of operations we can per-form without thinking about them.

— Alfred North Whitehead, An Introduction to Mathematics, 1911



Writing and cities are, inarguably, two of humanity’s most power-ful creations. Both have helped drive improvements in human well- being over the span of millennia. The innovation that is writing goes well beyond any implement used in the encoding process— be it the chisel, the stylus, the printing press, or the digital computer— much as the innovation that is the city goes well beyond the buildings and roads that constitute its physical aspects. Writing, which is itself a form of code, enables humans to communicate code. Cities grow as code evolves.

Sumerians’ medium of choice for “storing” writing preceded the pa-pyrus scroll used in Egypt and the paper used in Europe: they used tablets made of stone and clay. Since the discovery of Sumerian pic-tographic and cuneiform writing more than a century ago on the an-cient Mesopotamian plain (present- day Iraq), major excavations have unearthed over a quarter- million tablets and tablet fragments (see figure 2.1). Scholarly research has focused largely on the estimated 1 percent of these tablets that contain literary content. Far less attention has been paid to the overwhelming majority of tablets that relate pri-marily to economic activities, such as receipts, sales contracts, worker



25

26



26 The Advance of Code





FIGURE 2.1 The Oldest Known Recipe Book. This tablet from the Old Babylonian period (ca. 1750 BCE) includes twenty- five recipes for stews; twenty- one are meat stews, and four are vegetable stews.

© The Near East Collection, Yale University (YBC 4644). See http:// www.library.

yale.edu/ neareast/ exhibitions/ cuisine.html. Reprinted with permission of Yale University.

lists, wages, and natural resource and lexical lists.1 If the ratio of literary to economic tablets found accurately reflects those actually produced, then the tablets as a whole suggest that the Sumerians created not only the world’s first organized system of writing but also the world’s first large- scale database technology.

27



Code 27

The development of writing as a database technology reflects many patterns we find in later technologies. For one thing, it provides evi-dence of both discontinuous and incremental learning. Between 3200 BCE and 1500 BCE, for example, writing technology improved along every dimension. Markings initially carved in stone and on small rocks known as bullae were later etched on clay tablets. Accordingly, the chisel used to inscribe on stone was replaced by the reed stylus. The clay tab-lets, which initially were sun dried, were later baked in kilns to improve their strength. Kiln technology also changed dramatically, from primi-tive baking structures to high- temperature ovens. During the same period, the method of encoding tablets evolved to enable more efficient data entry. From approximately 3000 BCE to 2000 BCE, pictographs gave way to curvilinear symbols known as proto- cuneiform, and then to straight- edged cuneiform symbols.

As technology evolved, human work evolved with it. Over time, the labor involved in writing on tablets became differentiated by skill level. Early references to scribes name only the Dub- sar (“one who writes”); later references also refer to an accomplished subset of scribes known as Dub- sar- mah (“excellent writer”), and still later to an elite group known as the Dub- sar- lugal (“king of writers”). There is evidence that, toward the end of this period, some scribes specialized in literary writing while the remainder continued to record economic data. Scribal organiza-tions grew from small “tablet houses” to large proto- universities that by 1700 BCE were producing various forms of literature and treatises that ranged from divination to deductive reasoning (the first forms of science) to legal codes.2

Perhaps the most profound innovation in Sumerian writing, how-ever, was the cognitive leap that took place from a simple mnemonic— the accounting device pictograms were first used for— into abstract syl-labograms, which are phonetic representations of the spoken language. Syllabograms made it possible to produce a more complicated message and thus to relate a greater amount of information. For example, the etched symbol of a cow changed to a cuneiform symbol representing a cow, which later was transformed into a sound, such as “ah- b” that no longer literally meant “cow” but became a phonetic term that could be combined with another phonetic term through a series of established rules.3 This breakthrough is one of the more intellectually profound

28



28 The Advance of Code

advancements in the Sumerian “information system,” which was subse-quently copied by other Mesopotamian peoples such as the Akkadians and the Babylonians, and by other cultures throughout time.4

As a result of these cumulative innovations, the density of informa-tion stored on each tablet increased even as the cost of producing tab-lets decreased, which is an early example of an organizational learning curve— a phenomenon to which I will return in detail in chapter seven.

Creating tablets was itself a production technology— a particularly powerful one, as it enabled humans to encode other production tech-nologies. One of the earliest known tablets (3700 BCE), for example, contains a recipe for beer. Others appearing later (1700– 1500 BCE) contain algorithms for an array of algebraic operations. As mathema-tician Donald Knuth described in a 1972 paper on Babylonian algo-rithms, each operation in these algorithms closes with the phrase, “This is the procedure” (hence the subtitle of this chapter).5 In this sense, the earliest writing clearly embodied the dual nature of code as both artifact and algorithm.

With the creation of writing, humanity experienced its first informa-tion revolution.

It is not surprising that writing originated in one of humanity’s first great cities, the Mesopotamian city of Uruk, which was the largest set-tlement on earth at the end of the fourth millennium BCE. 6 It also is not surprising that Uruk, located on a now- dry ancient channel of the Euphrates River, was situated in a region that enjoyed exceptional agri-cultural abundance. The interesting question is, did agricultural abun-dance enable Mesopotamians to advance the algorithmic frontier, or was it the other way around? This is the question that Jane Jacobs posed in her 1969 book, The Economy of Cities.

Jane Jacobs was a journalist and urban activist who dedicated her career to understanding and promoting conditions of urban vibrancy. A longtime resident of New York City’s Greenwich Village, she was an outspoken critic of contemporary “urban renewal.”7 In 1968, Jacobs was arrested during a public hearing on plans to construct an expressway through lower Manhattan, including Washington Square Park. The plan did not go forward, but Jacobs found the battle so draining that she and her family relocated to Toronto. She lived there for the rest of

29



Code 29

her life, continuing her advocacy for the organic development of cities in her chosen new home.

Jacobs not only challenged conventional views on contemporary urban development in her writing and speaking, she also upended con-ventional thinking about the origins and growth of cities throughout history. She wrote in The Economy of Cities that “current theory in many fields assumes that cities are based upon a rural agricultural base.”8 She asserted that viewing cities simply as very big villages sustained by agri-culture is a grave error, arguing that cities are the source, not the recipi-ent, of agricultural abundance. Jacobs focused on the primacy of urban knowledge in agricultural productivity, as embodied in both practical ideas and physical products:

It can readily be seen in the world today that agriculture is not even

tolerably productive unless it incorporates many goods and services

produced in cities and transplanted from cities … Fertilizers, ma-

chines, electric power, refrigeration equipment, the results of plant

and animal research, and a host of other tangible goods and services

developed in cities.9

The three- field crop- rotation system that was central to Europe’s sharp increase in productivity during the twelfth century “centered around cities,” as did the cultivation of fodder crops and the practice of fitting them into the fallow year in the crop rotation. These innovations were developed in and around cities and then exported to rural areas.

Going back further in history, Jacobs conjectured extensively on the origins of Çatalhöyük, the earliest known city, which is located on the Konya Plain in modern- day Turkey: “Our remote ancestors did not expand their economies much by simply doing more of what they had already been doing: piling up more wild seeds and nuts, slaugh-tering more wild cattle and geese, making more spearheads, neck-laces, burins, and fires. They expanded their economies by adding new work. So do we.”10 The creation of new work was and still is a powerful driver of economic development: every time new work— a new production recipe— is created, it in turn creates new possibili-ties for the division of labor. According to Jacobs, the interaction between the creation of new recipes and the division of labor required

30



30 The Advance of Code

to perform them is the endogenous driver behind the development of cities in the long term.

in the past quarter- century, Jacobs’ view of the development of cities has received support from research undertaken by leading economists, including urbanists Edward Glaeser and Richard Florida, and Nobel Laureate macroeconomist Robert Lucas. However, the research that has reinforced the core theme of Jacobs’s work most intriguingly— that the growth of cities is a fundamentally algorithmic and organic process— has been done not by economists but by an interdisciplinary team of research scientists linked to the Santa Fe Institute in New Mexico: Luís Bettencourt, José Lobo, Dirk Helbing, Christian Kühnert, and Geoffrey West. I’ll call them the Santa Fe team.11

The Santa Fe team takes a deterministic approach to modeling the growth of cities that is counterintuitive— if not downright alarming— to anyone who believes that free will and human agency play a central role in determining social outcomes. And yet their model corresponds remarkably closely to the data for a large number of cities over time.

Their inquiry is motivated by a provocative question:

Cities as consumers of energy and resources and producers of arti-

facts, information, and waste have often been compared with bio-

logical entities … Recent analogies include cities as “living systems,”

or “organisms,” and notions of urban “ecosystems” and urban “me-

tabolism.” Are these terms just qualitative metaphors, or is there

quantitative and predictive substance in the implication that social

organizations are extensions of biology, satisfying similar principles

and constraints?12

To answer this question, the Santa Fe team referred to a well- known result in the biological sciences that pertains to the inverse relationship between the body mass of an organism and the rate of its metabolic processes. The basic idea is that bigger organisms have slower metabo-lisms and thus can subsist on less food per gram of body mass. For ex-ample, if a mouse were the size of an elephant but maintained a mouse’s metabolic rate it would need to consume roughly 20 times as many calories as an elephant actually does in order to survive.13 Elephants and

31



Code 31

other large mammals (including humans) are able to survive at our rela-tively large size because of the internal branching structures common to both large and small mammals that supply nutrients and remove waste efficiently, such as the veins that comprise the circulatory system and the bronchi that comprise lungs.

The Santa Fe team found that cities are like biological organisms when it comes to “metabolic” urban processes that are analogous to nutrient supply and waste removal— transportation, for example, has a branching structure much like veins or bronchi— but that cities differ fundamentally from biological organisms when it comes to indicators reflecting the creation and transmission of code. Measuring the size of cities based on population and on the urban “metabolism” using met-rics such as wages, GDP, electric power and gasoline consumption, and total road surface, the team found a systematic relationship between city size and indicators of the supply of “nutrients” and waste removal; they found further that these relationships hold across many orders of magnitude. However, while metabolic indicators do not keep pace with the size of cities as they grow, indicators relating to the creation and transmission of code increase at a greater rate than city size. The Santa Fe team thus concluded that “there are two different scaling behaviors [in cities]: material economies of scale, characteristic of infrastructure networks, vs. social interactions, responsible for innovation and wealth creation.”14 In short, the creation of ideas accelerates with city growth, whereas the cost of new infrastructure is minimized (see table 2.1).

This intriguing macro- level departure from the inverse relationships that hold for organisms ends up raising more questions about the evo-lution of cities than it answers: What mechanism enables larger cities to produce disproportionately more innovation and wealth than smaller cities? How do the macroeconomic measurables used in the Santa Fe team’s study relate to the microeconomic, work- creates- work dynam-ics that Jane Jacobs emphasized? Nevertheless, the commonality in the arguments made by Jacobs and the Santa Fe team is clear: processes of economic development in the long run are not led by land or natural resources; they are not led by infrastructure and capital; they are— unavoidably and irreducibly— led by ideas put into practice within the economy. Put another way, in the long run, the processes of economic development are led by code.

32



TABLE 2.1 Scaling Exponents for Urban Indicators versus City Size

Y β 2 95% Cl Adj- R Observations Country, Year

New patents 1.27 [1.25,1.29] 0.72 331 U.S. 2001

Inventors 1.25 [1.22,1.27] 0.76 331 U.S. 2001

Private R&D employment 1.34 [1.29,1.39] 0.92 266 U.S. 2002

“Supercreative” employment 1.15 [1.11,1.18] 0.89 287 U.S. 2003

R&D establishments 1.19 [1.14,1.22] 0.77 287 U.S. 1997

R&D employment 1.26 [1.18,1.43] 0.93 295 China 2002

Total wages 1.12 [1.09,1.13] 0.96 361 U.S. 2002

Total bank deposits 1.08 [1.03,1.11] 0.91 267 U.S. 1996

GDP 1.15 [1.06,1.23] 0.96 295 China 2002

GDP 1.26 [1.09,1.46] 0.64 196 EU 1999– 2003

GDP 1.13 [1.03,1.11] 0.94 37 Germany 2003

Total electrical consumption 1.07 [1.03,1.11] 0.88 392 Germany 2002

New AIDS cases 1.23 [1.18,1.29] 0.76 93 U.S. 2002– 2003

Serious crimes 1.16 [1.11,1.18] 0.89 287 U.S. 2003

Total housing 1.00 [0.99,1.01] 0.98 331 U.S. 2001

Total employment 1.01 [0.99,1.02] 0.98 331 U.S. 2001

Household electrical consumption 1.00 [0.94,1.06] 0.88 377 Germany 2002



33



Household electrical consumption 1.05 [0.89,1.22] 0.91 295 China 2002

Household water consumption 1.01 [0.89,1.11] 0.96 295 China 2002

Gasoline stations 0.77 [0.74,0.81] 0.93 318 U.S. 2001

Gasoline sales 0.79 [0.73,0.80] 0.94 318 U.S. 2001

Length of electrical cables 0.87 [0.82,0.92] 0.75 38 Germany 2002

Road surface 0.83 [0.74,0.92] 0.87 29 Germany 2002

CI = confidence interval; Adj- R2 = adjusted R2, GDP = gross domestic product This table provides scaling exponents (the parameter β in column 2) for a number of urban indicators as a function of city size. Values of β greater than 1 signify that the indicator in question increases more than proportionately with city size; values of β close to 1 signify that the indicator increases proportionately with city size; values of β less than 1 signify that the indicator in question increases less than proportionately with city size. Knowledge production indicators (the top six rows) all increase more than proportionately with city size, while transportation and electrical infrastructure indicators (the bottom four rows) increase less than proportionately. Source: Bettencourt et al., 2007



34



34 The Advance of Code

Code needs a platform and it needs an operating system. A city pro-vides both. In a city, however, code does not just run; in some literal, measurable sense it lives. In chapter nine I will elaborate on what it means for a city to be alive and clarify how platforms enable the cre-ation and evolution of code over time. For now it is enough for me to refer back to the quotation from mathematician and philosopher Alfred North Whitehead that opens this chapter: “Civilization advances by extending the number of operations we can perform without think-ing about them.”15 Whitehead makes a fundamental and important point: biological evolution and social evolution proceed according to this rule. Easier, or at least more fundamental, problems are solved first. The solutions to easier problems become encoded as hardware— roads, sewers, the power grid— that in turn provides the context for solving later and more complex problems.

Layers of history define a great city, which can be seen as a dense ac-cretion of solved problems. We build, in some cases literally, on the in-genuity of our ancestors, systematically forgetting that we have done so as we proceed. Neolithic humans living in villages, for example, solved the problem of making stones into effective hunting tools, whereas twenty- first- century humans convey traffic data by programming an app on a mobile phone. Clearly, many layers of solved problems sit be-tween the obsidian axe and the iPhone app. Each generation of solved problems provides a platform upon which future generations of solved problems are built.

Yet for all the positives of such a process, encoding as a platform invariably and unavoidably also results in a loss of information. Furthermore, the emergence of a platform decreases autonomy along some dimension. Plato felt this was true even of writing: “I cannot help feeling, Phaedrus, [says Socrates,] that writing is unfortunately like painting; for the creations of the painter have the attitude of life, and yet if you ask them a question they preserve a solemn silence … You would imagine that they had intelligence, but if you want to know anything and put a question to one of them, the speaker always gives one unvarying answer.”16 Two thousand years later, communica-tions theorist Marshall McLuhan echoed this point: “The alphabet is a technology of visual fragmentation and specialism [that leads to] a desert of classified data.”17 The dimensions of loss McLuhan notes with

35



Code 35

regard to the advance of code through writing are directly related to the loss humans experienced as we moved first from wilderness to the village and then from the village to the city. “By their dependence on the spoken word for information, people were drawn together into a tribal mesh … Audile- tactile tribal man partook of the collective un-conscious, lived in a magical integral world patterned by myth and ritual, its values divine.”18 The advance of code through the invention of writing intrinsically involved new constraints and a loss of information at the same time it increased human capacities and cognitive freedom. These dual effects are inherent in the advance of code.

In the past 350 years, a new alphabet has come into existence. It consists of only two letters: “0” and “1.” That alphabet— binary digital code— is today leading a wave of change that has implications as fun-damental to the human experience as the advent of writing.

When did this alphabet— from which the platforms of humanity’s future are being constructed— originate? Ironically, its origins trace to a year that some at the time believed would mark humanity’s cataclysmic end: 1666.

It is with that story that I start the next chapter.



Q 3



Machines

“The Universal Character”



One could carry out the description of a machine, no matter how com-plicated, in characters which would be merely the letters of the alphabet, and so provide the mind with a method of knowing the machine and all its parts … The human race will have a new kind of instrument which will increase the power of the mind much more than optical lenses strengthen the eyes.

— Gottfried Wilhelm Leibniz, in a note to Christiaan Huygens, 1679



In 1666, the city of London was consumed by a great fire. The fire began on Sunday, September 3, in a baker’s house on Pudding Lane. By the time it was done, it had consumed half the city, including St. Paul’s Cathedral, the Royal Exchange, and the Old Bailey. Coinciding as it did with the portentous date of 1666 in an era of intense sectarian strife that was rife with biblical significance, the fire was interpreted by many Londoners as having apocalyptic significance. Historical accounts sug-gest that Puritan minister Thomas Vincent was expressing the senti-ments of many Londoners when he proclaimed from the pulpit that “London, so famous for wisdom and dexterity, can now find neither brains nor hands to prevent its ruin. The hand of God was in it; the Decree was come forth: London must now fall.”1

London’s fall was not permanent, of course. Like a great forest, the city not only recovered from its fire but emerged far stronger. It turned out that the physical infrastructure thought to comprise the city was not it at all. The real city lay beneath the surface in the

36

37



Machines 37

practices, relationships, and capabilities that defined its “wisdom and dexterity.”

Although events in London ultimately belied the apocalyptic claims of Thomas Vincent and his Puritan brethren, 1666 did turn out to be a portentous year for humanity for reasons that could not have been anticipated.

That same year, a German natural philosopher by the name of Gottfried Leibniz published an essay titled “De arte combinatoria” (“On the Art of Combination”). Leibniz based the essay on his doctoral dissertation, which he wrote at the age of 20. In “De arte combinato-ria,” Leibniz set forth a method for reducing all logic to exact state-ments using binary expressions, which he dubbed the Characteristica Universalis, or Universal Character:2

“De arte combinatoria” aims to create a general method in which all

the truths of reason would be reduced to a kind of calculation. At the

same time, this would be reduced to a sort of universal language or

script, but infinitely different from all those projected hitherto, for

the symbols and even words in it would direct the reason, and errors,

except for those of fact, would be mere mistakes in calculation. It

would be very difficult to form or invent this language or character-

istic, but very easy to understand it without any dictionaries.3

In the Universal Character, any concept can be expressed as a com-bination of a small number of basic concepts, in somewhat the same way words are combinations of letters. Statements can be composed of combinations of concepts, thereby generating a combinatoric “logic of invention”— a language for differentiation and recombination in the realm of ideas.

“De arte combinatoria” presented a theory of information based on binary code in which Leibniz described, for the first time in recorded history, the fundamental idea that would become digital computation.

In the mid-sixteenth century, as a gradual but pervasive revolution in agricultural methods took place, the medieval social order gradually gave way to an age of unprecedented prosperity and population growth. By the late eighteenth century, as the “jobbe of work” performed for

38



38 The Advance of Code

compensation grew more specialized, the organizational environments in which those tasks were performed had become significantly more structured and complex. To improve efficiency, workers gradually gave up authority. Among the leaders of this change was a statistician named Gaspard Clair François Marie Riche de Prony, who was tasked with mapping a vast, fertile plain ringed by mountains that lay at the western end of the European continent: France.

De Prony was in a tight spot. Within a few years of the storming of the Bastille, as the Revolution raged on in France, de Prony received his challenging assignment to prepare a detailed map of France that would facilitate the accurate measurement of property as the basis for taxation. The magnitude of this task would stretch the limits of existing compu-tational techniques. At that time, before the advent of any type of cal-culating machine, the only way to reduce the burden of computational work systematically was to create mathematical tables that specified the values of commonly used functions, such as the sine, cosine, and log-arithm. Thus de Prony initiated the most ambitious effort anyone had undertaken to date to create a full set of mathematical tables, his goal being to ease administrative computation.4 The challenge was figuring out how to perform the huge number of calculations required to create the necessary tables.

As the supply of mathematicians trained to calculate the desired values using then- standard techniques was not nearly adequate for the task, de Prony came up with the idea of breaking down the required computation into discrete and repetitive tasks that less skilled human computers could manage. To staff the project he had another inspired idea: he would employ out- of- work hairdressers.

Picture Marie Antoinette and you will be reminded of the (literal) heights to which the craft of hairstyling rose during the reign of Louis XVI. The elaborate coiffures of courtesans at Versailles were among the most evident and reviled symbols of the French monarchy’s self- indulgence in its final days. Following the French Revolution, to appear in public with such a hairstyle was to risk the loss not only of the hair but also of the head to which the hair was attached. Consequently, sculptured hairstyles went out of fashion quickly, and with them the jobs of the highly skilled coiffeurs and wigmakers who created them. It was in this minor misfortune that Gaspard de Prony saw opportunity.

39



Machines 39

Reflecting on the project following its completion, de Prony cited Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations as his inspiration:

I came across the chapter where the author treats the division of

labor citing, as an example of the great advantages of this method,

the manufacture of pins. I conceived all of a sudden the idea of ap-

plying the same method to the immense work with which I had been

burdened, and to manufacture logarithms as one manufactures pins.5

What de Prony accomplished— beyond creating one of the largest sets of mathematical tables ever compiled— was to apply the principle of the division of labor systematically to mental work, anticipating by over a century the creation of the modern office (see Text Box 3.1).

If de Prony, like Leibniz before him, was a pioneer in developing the software of digital computing that has enabled the rapid advance of code in our lifetime, then credit for pioneering the hardware of digital com-puting goes to another French revolutionary: a famed weaver and some-time soldier, Joseph Marie Charles, known as Joseph Marie Jacquard.6

In 1801, French silk weavers in Lyon, concerned about the potential mechanization of their craft, gathered to destroy the model for a newly patented treadle loom that had been awarded the bronze medal for technical achievement at the Second Paris Industrial Exposition.7 The loom’s inventor, Joseph Marie Jacquard, later recalled, “The iron was sold for old iron, the wood for kindling, while I was delivered over to universal ignominy.”8 Fortunately, not only for Jacquard but for the rest of the world, his ignominy was short lived. Three years later he unveiled another loom that featured a novel control mechanism for a drawloom that would, over the coming century, not only dominate weaving but seed a far- reaching revolution in the organization of work and society.

The drawloom was invented in China during the second century BCE, and for nearly two millennia thereafter, silk weaving was a tedi-ous and exacting process. To create a woven pattern, a silk weaver had to lift individual threads of the warp (the parallel threads that hold the pattern in place) to let each row of the weft (the threads that create the design) pass through perpendicularly. By the start of the nine-teenth century, machine manufacturers had figured out how to build

40



40 The Advance of Code



Text Box 3.1 The Birth of “the Office”

By the twentieth century, the systematic approach to analyzing the

division of labor that de Prony developed would have a name: man-

agement science. The first and foremost proponent of management

science was Frederick Winslow Taylor, a child of privilege who found

his calling in factories.

Born to a wealthy Philadelphia family and educated in his youth

in Europe, Taylor’s parents later sent him to boarding school at

the exclusive Phillips Exeter Academy in Exeter, New Hampshire.

However, following graduation, Taylor broke from the usual path

taken by an Exeter graduate; he neither enrolled in an Ivy League

university nor sought a position as a clerk in a Boston firm. Instead,

much to his parents’ astonishment and dismay, he accepted a posi-

tion as an apprentice machinist in a hydraulic works.

This first experience of factory work gave Taylor an understand-

ing of the habits of workers that was as intimate as it was, ultimately,

unfavorable. Being highly organized and precise by nature, Taylor was

appalled at the lax habits and absence of structure that characterized

the early twentieth- century factory floor. Taylor would later assert

that there is not a single worker “who does not devote a considerable

part of his time to studying just how slowly he can work and still

convince his employer that he is going at a good pace.”9 However,

Taylor ultimately concluded that the blame did not lie in the workers

but in the lack of rigorously considered management techniques. At

the center of management, Taylor determined, was the capacity to

precisely define the tasks of which a “job” was comprised.

What distinguished Taylor was his absolute conviction that work-

ers could not be left on their own to define, much less refine, the

tasks that comprised their work. He argued that authority must be

fully vested in scientifically determined routine— which is to say,

code. Defining such routines was the paramount task of manage-

ment. Taylor wrote:

It is only through enforced standardization of methods, enforced adoption of the best implements and working conditions, and

41



Machines 41



enforced cooperation that this faster work can be assured. And the duty of enforcing the adoption of standards and enforcing this cooperation rests with the management alone.10

To Taylor, workers’ loss of autonomy was an essential element in

achieving efficiency in the modern organization. He believed it was

tied directly to the “how” of production— the specific work to be

performed.

A disciple of Taylor’s, W. H. Leffingwell, took on the task of

extending Taylor’s methodology from the factory to a domain of

work growing in importance: the office. In two mammoth books,

Leffingwell observed with horror the gross inefficiencies of the early

twentieth- century office, describing in minute detail how imposi-

tion of the principles of scientific management could improve office

productivity.

As Nikil Saval describes in his revelatory chronicle, Cubed: A Secret

History of the Workplace, “besides demonstrating the mania of

Taylorists for infinite subdivision of tasks and time study, Leffingwell’s

treatise unconsciously reveals the sheer novelty of office life itself—

the fact that managers were mostly unsure of how to organize and

run offices.”11 The nineteenth- century “counting house,” familiar to

readers of Melville in “Bartleby the Scrivener” or of Dickens in A

Christmas Carol, had been replaced by a new and significant domain

of productive work as significant as the factories. According to Saval,

“the notion of ‘the office’ itself, as a separate world, with its own rules

and atmosphere and culture, was being justified under the rubric of

management. The office was no longer an administrative holding

tank, parasitic on the ‘real work’ done in factories and fields, but the

place where the real work was in fact getting done.”12



automatic looms dedicated to specific designs. The innovation was to use rods with hooks on the end to lift particular threads in the waft in a precise sequence, taking the place of human arms and fingers. The shortcoming of such looms was that they were “hardwired” to produce single designs and could not be reconfigured to produce other ones.

42



42 The Advance of Code

As demand for Lyonnaise silk grew rapidly with the emergence of a middle class in France and elsewhere in Europe, the inefficient manual drawloom constrained the silk industry’s ability to increase production and maintain its market dominance. Consequently, the industry was in crisis.

Joseph Marie Jacquard was an unlikely person to take on the chal-lenge of saving his hometown through technological innovation. He had inherited his father’s silk- weaving business at the age of 20 but managed it poorly and went through his entire inheritance. For a time he worked as a laborer, but he was rescued from his life of poverty by the coming of the French Revolution. He served as a soldier, fighting first, and briefly, against the revolutionaries and then deftly changing sides to fight with them. Jacquard did not even begin to work on an improved drawloom until he was 47 years old— already beyond the ex-pected lifespan for a Frenchman of his era. However, once Jacquard put his mind to invention he quickly found his calling.

Jacquard’s innovation was to combine the automatic function of hardwired drawlooms with a mechanism for controlling the loom that could be reprogrammed with relative ease using wooden cards per-forated with precisely punched holes— a technology that came to be known as punched cards. The principle was simple. At every stage in the weaving process, an array of rods with hooks on their tips would descend to the punch card specified for that step. Where a hole was present, the rod passed through the card and lifted the specified thread, which allowed the weft to slide through perpendicularly. Where no hole was present, the rod encountered resistance and did not descend further (see figure 3.1).

The most important characteristic of the Jacquard loom was, of course, that it worked. It could produce designs of any complexity at more than 20 times the speed of a manual drawloom. In 1804, Jacquard patented his “loom for weaving brocade using punched cards to con-trol the action of the warp threads and therefore to control every row of weaving.” The following year, newly crowned Emperor Napoleon Bonaparte visited Jacquard’s workshop in Lyon, just days after issuing a decree declaring the Jacquard mechanism to be public property. The inventor received an annual pension of roughly $100,000 per year in today’s terms and a royalty for every loom sold.

43



Machines 43

(a)





(b)





FIGURE 3.1 Punched Cards for a Jacquard Loom and IBM Computer. 3.1a. Punched cards in use in a Jacquard loom. German Museum of Technology, Berlin. 3.1b. This is the front of a blue IBM- style punch card. It shows the Latin alphabet character code.

The impact Jacquard’s invention had on the silk- weaving industry in Lyon was sudden and strongly positive; production levels and wages both rose dramatically. By 1840, six years after Jacquard’s death, the Count of Fortis would write in a book celebrating Jacquard’s legacy that “the invention of Jacquard has produced a general and total revolution in the procedures for manufacturing; it has traced a great line between

44



44 The Advance of Code

the past and the future; it has initiated a new era in general progress.”13 That same year, the city of Lyon erected a statue of Jacquard on the site where his first loom had been destroyed.14

Changes in the nature of production during the late eighteenth and early nineteenth centuries mirrored changes in the political system in Europe. Kings and craftsmen alike relinquished autonomy (and, as in the case of King Louis XVI, their heads) as codes of political order and production advanced in parallel, taking precedence over human judgment and whim to an unprecedented extent. While practices of modern democracy and automated production would take more than a century to mature, it is arguably no coincidence that they originated in the same places at the same time.

France led the advance of code during this era of revolutionary changes, but England was not far behind. At about the same time the citizens of Lyon were erecting their monument to Jacquard, his prag-matic invention was inspiring a new set of breakthroughs across the English Channel.15 The protagonists in this round were an unlikely duo of mathematicians: the iconoclastic inventor Charles Babbage, and Augusta Ada King, Countess of Lovelace.

as london began to grow again following the great fire of 1666, it gradually absorbed surrounding towns and villages. Among these was the town of St. Mary at the Bourne on the banks of the Tybourne (later Tyburn), which, following a sequence of transfers in and out of royal hands and in the written form of its name, ended up as the London neighborhood of Marylebone. By the early 1800s, Marylebone was a hub of Bohemianism and creativity. Among its residents was an icono-clastic inventor named Charles Babbage.

Babbage was a force of nature. His list of accomplishments as com-piled by the Computer History Museum in Mountain View, California, reads like random entries from an encyclopedia of technology. Babbage pioneered lighthouse signaling, invented the ophthalmoscope, pro-posed using “black- box” recorders to monitor railway conditions and help determine the cause of catastrophes, advocated for decimal cur-rency, and proposed the use of tidal power to replace exhausted coal reserves. He also designed a cow- catcher for the front end of locomo-tives, a failsafe quick- release coupling mechanism for railway carriages,

45



Machines 45

multicolored theater lighting, an altimeter, a seismic detector, a tugboat for winching vessels upstream, a hydrofoil, and an arcade game that enabled members of the public to challenge him at tic- tac- toe.16

Babbage was as comfortable, and apparently took as much joy in, ad-vancing pure mathematics as he did in observing the activities on a factory floor in the most minute detail. Herbert Simon, a pioneer in the field of ar-tificial intelligence and recipient of the 1978 Nobel Prize in Economics (see Text Box 3.2), once observed that Babbage, “perhaps more than any man since Leonardo de Vinci[,] exemplified in his life and work the powerful ways in which fundamental science could contribute to practical affairs, and practical affairs to science … He was one of the strongest mathemati-cians of his generation, but he devoted his career to the improvement of manufacturing arts, and— most remarkable of all— to the invention of the digital computer in something very close to its modern form.”17

Inspired by Gaspard de Prony’s success in calculating trigonometric tables through the division of labor, Babbage sought to embody the code de Prony had developed into a mechanical device. Babbage called his device the Difference Engine. An algorithm that had started as an idea in de Prony’s head had, due to his exceptionally systematic approach to the division of labor, been converted into written rules— a form of “software”— to be followed by the human computers he recruited from among some unemployed hairdressers; Babbage, the genius tinkerer, in turn converted that software into hardware, the Difference Engine.18

Remarkable as it was on its own terms, the Difference Engine is remembered today not only as an ingenious machine for calculating trigonometric tables but as the predecessor to Babbage’s subsequent in-vention, the Analytical Engine.

In his Marylebone home, Babbage had for years displayed the frac-tion of the Difference Engine he had managed to complete, which was a conversation piece at the many soirées Babbage hosted.19 The Difference Engine was designed to tabulate polynomial functions, which was useful in generating the trigonometric tables used in naviga-tion and engineering— domains of first- order economic significance in Georgian and Victorian England. Before he completed the Difference Engine, however, Babbage shifted his attention to a more ambitious project, the Analytical Engine, a general- purpose problem- solver that was the predecessor of modern programmable computers.

46



46 The Advance of Code



Text Box 3.2 “Over the Christmas holiday, Al and I invented

a thinking machine.”

One evening in January 1956, Herbert Simon took his wife and

three children to his office at Carnegie Mellon University’s Graduate

School of Industrial Administration, where he was a professor, to

get their help with a very particular project: running the first pro-

gram ever developed to simulate human intelligence. The program

was called the Logic Theorist, or LT. Earlier that month, Simon had

walked into the first session of the semester for one of his courses and

announced, “Over the Christmas holiday, Al and I invented a think-

ing machine.” It was true: Simon and his colleague Al Newell were

the first to realize the vision Gottfried Leibniz had expressed almost

three centuries earlier for “a general method in which all the truths

of reason would be reduced to a kind of calculation.”20

Simon was slightly ahead of himself in making his pronounce-

ment, as the LT wasn’t actually running on a computer yet. However,

as he later recalled, “we knew precisely how to write the program.”

That is where Simon’s family came into the picture:

While awaiting completion of the computer implementation of LT, Al and I wrote out the rules for the components of the pro-gram (subroutines) in English on index cards, and also made up cards for the contents of memories (the axioms of logic). To each member of [my family] we gave one of the cards, so that each person became, in effect, a component of the LT computer program— a subroutine that performed some special function, or a component of its memory. It was the task of each partici-pant to execute his or her subroutine, or to provide the contents of his or her memory, whenever called by the routine at the next level above that was then in control.

So we were able to simulate the LT with a computer con-

structed of human components. Here was nature imitating art imitating nature.21

In this manner, Simon’s wife (not a trained mathematician) and his

three children, then ages nine, eleven, and thirteen, were able to

47



Machines 47



prove the first 25 or so theorems in Alfred North Whitehead and

Bertrand Russell’s Principia Mathematica. Proving theorems was to

the early history of digital computation what calculating trigono-

metric tables was to the early history of mechanical computation: a

proof of concept, using human computers, that had profound future

significance.

That evening of family fun in 1956 launched the field of artificial

intelligence.



Babbage’s vision of the Analytical Engine was inspired by none other than French digital computing pioneer Joseph Marie Jacquard. Babbage eventually removed the Difference Engine from his hallway and replaced it with a portrait of Jacquard, then challenged his guests to guess the medium used to create the portrait. Most guests— including the Duke of Wellington— guessed that it was an engraving. Babbage was delighted by such incorrect guesses, for the portrait was in fact a finely woven tapestry produced using an automated Jacquard loom (see figure 3.2). For Babbage, the ability for a computer to produce a product indistinguishable from that of a human clearly suggested the potential power of the Analytical Engine he envisioned.22

Babbage did not labor on the Analytical Engine in isolation. He was aided by— indeed, worked collaboratively with— a woman 24 years his junior, who was an able mathematician in her own right. Her name was Augusta Ada King, Countess of Lovelace, or Ada Lovelace as she is now remembered. In a set of technical notes she authored in 1843 with some input from Babbage, Lovelace set forth a description that is more complete than any found in Babbage’s writings of how the Analytical Engine might function as a general- purpose computer. Whereas the Difference Engine had been designed to calculate a specific set of nauti-cal tables, Lovelace wrote, the Analytical Engine “is not merely adapted for tabulating the results of one particular function and of no other, but for developing and tabulating any function whatever … In enabling a mechanism to combine together general symbols, in successions of unlimited variety and extent, a uniting link is established between the operations of matter and the abstract mental processes.” The “general

48



48 The Advance of Code





FIGURE 3.2 Joseph Marie Jacquard. This portrait of Jacquard was woven in silk on a Jacquard loom and required 24,000 punched cards to create (1839). It was only produced to order. Charles Babbage owned one of these portraits; it inspired him in using perforated cards in his analytical engine. It is in the collection of the Science Museum in London, England.

Source: Science Museum, London, England.

49



Machines 49

symbols” to which Lovelace referred were similar to the Universal Character Leibniz had envisioned, which were now tied more closely to practical application via the Analytical Engine. Lovelace was thus the first to envision the idea of code as executed by a computer— which is to say, software.

In their work on the Analytical Engine, Babbage and Lovelace were on the brink of a breakthrough, but neither would live to see it occur. Lovelace died of uterine cancer in 1851, at the age of 36. Babbage lived to be nearly 80, but he was never able to construct a working version of the Analytical Engine. Generations would pass before work on digital computing was to advance again in earnest.

When digital computing did advance, it did so far from the fashion-able salons of Marylebone. Much like Gaspard de Prony, those who created the first digital computer worked within government bureau-cracies and were motivated by the need to perform calculations in large quantities in the service of urgent national imperatives. Also like de Prony, those who developed the first digital computer first sought to solve the problem by delegating work among a large number of human computers.

This first installment in the history of digital computing illustrates the deep relationships that have existed from the beginning between the evolution of algorithms and the evolution of work. The next chap-ter will demonstrate that the fact that digital computers are able to outperform humans in performing mental tasks should come as no surprise.

They were designed to do just that.





Computers




Q 4

Predicting the Weather



Gains from algorithmic progress have been roughly fifty to one hundred percent as large as those from hardware progress. Improvements tend to be incremental, forming a relatively smooth curve on the scale of years.

— Katja Grace, “Algorithmic Progress in Six Domains,” 2013



Throughout human history—until 12pm on Sunday, March 5, 1950—predicting the weather was a practical impossibility.

In nearly all early civilizations, the terrible capriciousness of the wind and sky prompted people to concoct meteorological deities, which led to the powerful social roles shamans and early priests played in ancient times. In Egypt, Amun was the god of wind and creation; Anshar and An were the Mesopotamian god and goddess of the sky. Among the Māori, Tāwhirimātea was the god of weather, and in ancient Greece, Zeus was the ruler of Mount Olympus, king of the gods, and the god of sky, thunder, law, order, and fate.

However, awe and fear of the heavens did not prevent ancient people from seeking to mitigate the adverse consequences of meteorological variability.1 The Sumerians were the first to manage the rains by im-plementing large- scale irrigation. This enabled them to create Uruk, among the world’s first cities. The capital city of King Gilgamesh, hero of The Epic of Gilgamesh, Uruk was built on the Euphrates River. The Sumerians also invented the alphabet and were the first to encode com-putational procedures.2 Interestingly, of the 1,255 logogram words and 2,511 compound words compiled in the most authoritative Sumerian

50

51



Computers 51

lexicon, more than 140 pertain to water.3 The Sumerian preoccupation with floods was sufficiently great that the Euphrates River is encoded in Sumerian as buranun, which is a concatenation of bu (to rush around), ra (to flood, overflow), and nun (great, noble). Moreover, a consid-erable fraction of existing Sumerian tablets pertain to hydrology. The Epic of Gilgamesh famously features a description of a Great Flood— similar, in at least one surviving version of The Epic, to that in the Old Testament— that further underscores the Sumerians’ preoccupation with water and the weather.

Roughly three millennia after the ascendency of Uruk, Aristotle wrote Meteorology, the first systematic attempt to explain climatic phe-nomena. Theophrastus, Aristotle’s contemporary and his successor as director of the Lyceum in Athens, wrote two short treatises on the topic of weather prediction that were titled “On Winds” and “On Weather Signs.” Although fragmentary and inaccurate, these works by Theophrastus provided the framework for Western attempts to fore-cast the weather for the next two thousand years, until Enlightenment- era advances by Edmund Halley (for whom the comet is named) and George Hadley set the stage for scientific understanding of the weather.4

By 1922, meteorological theory had advanced to the point that British mathematician and physicist Lewis Fry Richardson could engage in wild speculation: “Perhaps some day in the dim future it will be pos-sible to advance the computations faster than the weather advances … But that is a dream.”5 Richardson had fairly specific ideas about what it might take to realize this dream:

In the tropics the weather is often foreknown, so that we may

say [that the computation of global weather patterns will involve]

2000 active columns. So that 32 × 2000 = 64,000 computers

would be needed to race the weather for the whole globe. That

is a staggering figure. Perhaps in some years’ time it may be pos-

sible to report a simplification of the process. But in any case, the

organization indicated is a central forecast- factory for the whole

globe, or for portions extending to boundaries where the weather

is steady, with individual computers specializing on the separate

equations.6

52



52 The Advance of Code

As Richardson continued to speculate about what he termed a “fore-cast factory,” the “computers” he had in mind were neither mechan-ical nor electrical, analog nor digital. They were, in fact, just people performing mathematical computations by hand or with mechani-cal calculators, using sheets of paper to record their work— in other words, just the sort of “computers” Gaspard de Prony had used two centuries earlier. Recognizing the likely tedium of working in the sort of computational sweatshop he envisioned, Richardson offered an empathic qualification: “Let us hope for [the human computers’] sakes that they are moved on from time to time to new operations,” by which he literally meant the calculation of different mathematical functions.7

At the time Richardson was writing, his concept was indeed closer to a dream than reality. But only 15 years later, a 24- year- old prodigy named Alan Turing published a paper in The Proceedings of the London Mathematical Society describing the fundamentals of a digital comput-ing machine that had the potential to realize Richardson’s far- fetched vision. “The idea behind digital computers may be explained by saying that these machines are intended to carry out any operations which could be done by a human computer,” he wrote in a later paper.8 He elaborated by describing the work of a human computer that was fully consistent with those used by Richardson and others in the 1920s and 1930s: “The human computer is supposed to be following fixed rules; he has no authority to deviate from them in any detail. We may suppose that these rules are supplied in a book, which is altered whenever he is put on to a new job. He has also an unlimited supply of paper on which he does his calculations.”9

The outbreak of World War II in 1939 created a sudden and urgent need for just such human computers to perform computational work, but of a military rather than a meteorological variety. At the Ballistic Research Laboratory— the U.S. Army’s primary weapons- testing facility— the demand for this specialized labor was so great that the military established a secret unit called the Philadelphia Computing Section (PCS) at the University of Pennsylvania’s Moore School of Electrical Engineering. The army recruited one hundred human com-puters, mostly women, from the University of Pennsylvania and neigh-boring schools.10

53



Computers 53

Creating the PCS was an institutional innovation of precisely the same type, and within an order of magnitude of the scale, as that Richardson had imagined. Nonetheless, it turned out to be far from adequate to the task.11 By August 1944, Herman Goldstine, a mathema-tician and Army lieutenant who was the liaison between the Ballistic Research Laboratory and the PCS, would lament, “The number of tables for which work has not yet started because of lack of compu-tational facilities far exceeds the number in progress. Requests for the preparation of new tables are being currently received at the rate of six per day.”12

Goldstine had not, however, placed all his bets on the PCS. A year earlier he had been prompted by a colleague to seek out John Mauchly, a physics instructor at the Moore School who had written a memoran-dum proposing that the calculations being performed by PCS workers could be completed thousands of times more rapidly using a digital computer built with vacuum tubes. Goldstine obtained funding for Mauchly’s proposal and shortly thereafter engaged renowned mathe-matician John von Neumann to be its leader.13 The effort to construct the world’s first general- purpose digital computer was under way. On February 14, 1946, less than six months after the end of World War II, the Army announced the completion of the Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer, or ENIAC.

With the war over, the Army dedicated its powerful new computing resource to a priority that had emerged directly from the war effort: de-termining the feasibility of the hydrogen bomb. From the outset, how-ever, von Neumann had his eye on solving a problem even more chal-lenging than that of computing nuclear chain reactions: predicting the weather. In May 1946, just three months after the ENIAC had become operational, von Neumann submitted a proposal for the creation of a meteorology group at the Moore School:

The objective of this project is an investigation of the theory of dy-

namic meteorology in order to make it accessible to high- speed, elec-

tronic, digital, automatic computing, of a type which is beginning

to be available, and which is likely to be increasingly available in

the future. It is also expected that these investigations will give in-

dications as to what further observations are necessary— both of the

54



54 The Advance of Code

laboratory type and of the field type— in order to make theoretical

work, that is supported by such high speed computing, fully more

effective.

The Navy funded the proposal immediately, and work began on July 1, 1946.14

Synthesizing all known meteorological science into a set of programs that conformed to the ENIAC’s operational constraints was a far from trivial task (see Text Box 4.1). Nonetheless, little more than three years after they had gotten started, von Neumann and his team had come up with an approach they could test.



Text Box 4.1 The Determinants of Computational Speed

Scientists, including Lewis Fry Richardson and Carl- Gustaf Rossby,

had long ago worked out the equations governing smooth atmo-

spheric changes. The challenge lay in the scale of the earth and the

sheer number of computations required to arrive at a numerical pre-

diction. The specific problem the ENIAC solved in order to com-

pute the first weather forecast was the “Numerical Integration of the

Baratropic Vorticity Equation.”

While the ENIAC was a powerful new tool for performing com-

putations, it was not without its limitations. As von Neumann him-

self described at the time, the ENIAC was a quick thinker, but it had

a terrible memory: “Imagine that you take 20 people, lock them up

in a room for three years, provide them with 20 desk multipliers, and

institute the rule: During the entire proceedings all of them together

may never have more than one page written full. They can erase any

amount, put it back again, but they are entitled at any given time

only to one page. It’s clear where the bottleneck … 15 lies.”

Whether referring to human or machine computers, we can gen-

erally define three possible levels of memory. First, there is memory

located adjacent to the processing unit that can be accessed very

quickly. For humans, the processing unit is the brain, and this type of

storage is called short- term memory; for computers it is called cache

memory. We’ll refer to both as Level 1 Memory. There is a limit to

55



Computers 55



the amount of data the computer (human or machine) can retain

in Level 1 memory, so the computer supplements it with the abil-

ity to read and write data on, say, a sheet of paper for a human or a

Random Access Memory (RAM) device for a computer. To describe

fully the bottleneck to which von Neumann refers, add one more

constraint: each operator may have access to only a limited amount

of such immediately available, but temporary, memory. We’ll refer to

this as Level 2 memory. To make life a bit easier for our processors,

allow for the existence of a third level of memory. For the human,

this could be a library in the basement where the human computers

may go to look up information; for the computer, it’s a hard drive or

CD- ROM. Data stored in this format are more permanent, but also

considerably more difficult to access. We’ll refer to this third level of

memory as storage.

For each processor, performing the work required to complete a

single computational cycle requires the following:

• The function to be calculated

• Data on the weather in the neighboring zone during the previous

15- minute interval stored on some medium (for example, a set of numbers written on a sheet of paper from which to read)

• A processing unit with which to calculate the value of the function

(for the human computer, a brain, potentially supplemented by a mechanical calculator)

• Some medium on which to store output data (a sheet of paper with

blank space on which to write)

Given these elements of the computational cycle, it’s clear that

one dimension of computational speed has to do with computer

hardware— the machine itself. The other has to do with the overall

computational strategy employed, taking the hardware as given—

the algorithm or computer program employed.

The speed of the processing unit determines how long it takes

each individual unit to process the output once the relevant data are

available, given the function to be computed. This will determine

the minimum size of a computation cycle. If the problem is simple

56



56 The Advance of Code



and the data inputs can be remembered easily, then the computation

cycle can be the length of time required for the processor to perform

a simple arithmetical computation in his or her “head” (literally or

figuratively). But what if a processor is unable to recall the function

from (short- term) memory and must refer back to the sheet of paper

constantly while performing calculations? Or, even worse, what if

the most condensed expression of the function to be computed is

so lengthy that it doesn’t fit on the allocated sheets of paper, so the

processor must repeatedly run down to the data storage library to

retrieve it in component parts? In that case, even if well organized

and otherwise managed as efficiently as possible, the overall process

could be very slow indeed.

The size of Level 1 and Level 2 memory and the time required to

access storage, when required, will all have a direct bearing on the

overall time required to perform our computation. Of even greater

importance will be the ability of the overall organizational and tech-

nological design of the algorithm to work effectively within existing

constraints.



At 12pm on Sunday, March 5, 1950, the ENIAC team set into motion the first weather forecast ever undertaken by a digital— rather than human— computer. The ENIAC’s computation of the first dig-ital weather forecast lasted 33 days and nights. Jule Charney, who led the meteorology group at Princeton’s Institute for Advanced Study and oversaw the work with von Neumann, wrote of the outcome on April 10, 1950: “We returned from Aberdeen only Saturday, after having been given a week’s extension on the ENIAC. The extra week made all the difference in the world. At the end of the four weeks we had made two 24- hour forecasts. The first, as you know, was not remarkable for accuracy … The second turned out to be surprisingly good.”16 The team was ecstatic. They had proved that weather predic-tion was possible, if within limits. As Charney, von Neumann, and their colleague Ragnar Fjortoft noted in their paper summarizing the experiment, “The computation time for a 24- hour forecast was about 24 hours, that is, we were just able to keep pace with the weather.”17

57



Computers 57

Granted, being able to compute a weather prediction at about the same pace the weather is actually happening might not seem a great achievement, but even at that early stage the pioneers of computing knew something that the rest of us later learned: that computers have a tendency to get faster over time. Actually, a lot faster. As Charney later noted, “It mattered little that the twenty- four hour prediction was twenty- four hours in the making. That was a purely technological prob-lem. Two years later we were able to make the same prediction on our own machine in five minutes.”18

“Binary” means “something made of, or based on, two things or parts.” A binary computer is one that comprises information conveyed as lists of zeroes and ones. Consequently, the elementary unit of memory and storage in a binary computer is defined as the bit, which stores a value of either zero or one. The word “bit” is just a contraction of “binary digit,”19 thus a “binary computer” is the same as a “digital computer.”

Since it’s not possible to do much that is useful with a single bit, computer scientists early on defined another fundamental unit, the byte, which is eight bits— the size of the eight- day binary weather record I described at the start of this passage. With a byte it is possible to specify a letter or a mark of punctuation (see Text Box 4.2).20

We can use binary numbers not only to encode data— such as, “it only rained on friday”— but also to encode instructions— such as, “do not run the sprinkler system after any rainy day” or “mix wet ingredients and dry ingredients separately, then combine.”21 Data, and instructions to take actions based on that data, are conveyed in the same binary language.

When it comes to the power of digital computers, industry analysts and journalists alike tend to focus on processor speed. That’s partly because it’s relatively easy to measure, but also because improvements in proces-sor speed over the past half- century have been impressive (see figure 4.1). The famed Moore’s Law, which originated in a paper published by Intel cofounder Gordon Moore in 1965, is all about processor speed.22 Moore described a yearly doubling of the number of components per integrated circuit (later updated to a doubling every two years), which is directly re-lated to increased processor speed. The specific quantitative relationship first described by Moore held for nearly a half- century. From the stand-point of fundamental technological possibilities, it explains the advent of

58



58 The Advance of Code



Text Box 4.2 Binary Encoding

Let us say I wanted to store information on whether any precipita-

tion occurred at a particular location over the period of eight days.

My rule for encoding the weather is: If any precipitation occurred at

that location on that date, I write “1”; if not I write “0.” At the end

of eight days, beginning and ending, for example, on Sunday, I have

recorded the following data: 00000100. This tells me that it rained

only one day: Friday. Recording these data for eight days in this

manner required 8 bits of information. This can be generalized: the

number of distinct possibilities that can be expressed with a binary

number n is 2 raised to the nth power, or 2n. With one digit I can

encode 21 = 2 possibilities; with two digits, 22 = 4 possibilities; with

eight digits, 28 = 256 possibilities.

The more bits I have, the greater amount of information I can

convey. With one bit I can express only two possibilities: “Yes” or

“No.” With two bits I can express four possibilities: “Yes, Yes,” “Yes,

No,” “No, Yes,” and “No, No.” With three bits I can express eight

possibilities. “Yes, Yes, Yes,” “Yes, Yes, No,” “Yes, No, Yes,” “Yes, No,

No,” “No, Yes, Yes,” “No, Yes, No,” “No, No, Yes,” “No, No, No.”

And so forth.

Let’s go back to my weather example. What would it mean to have

“information” about the weather— even about as simple a question as

whether or not any precipitation was experienced at a particular loca-

tion on each day of a given eight- day interval. Without any informa-

tion, anything is possible. Rain may have fallen every day. Rain may

have fallen no days. Rain may have fallen some days, but not others.

In all, there are 28 = 256 possibilities. When I record the outcome

“00000100” I have narrowed those 256 possibilities down to one. To

convey that information requires eight binary digits. So, the message

that it only rained on Friday contains eight bits of information.

Of course, I can also convey the same information by sending a

message in type: “it only rained on friday.” I can do this in binary

code by expressing each digit as a binary number. How do we do

this? Very simply: By assigning each binary number, from 1 to 26, to

a specific letter of the alphabet. For example

59



Computers 59



• 00001 = a

• 00010 = b

• 00011 = c

• all the way to

• 11010 = z

In other words, 11010 is the binary representation of the decimal

number 26, and “z” is the 26th letter in the alphabet. So with five

digits it is possible to specify, among 26 possible letters, the one let-

ter that we intend to communicate. In that sense, communication

of a single letter requires 5 bits of information (the number of digits

in 11010).

What this example illustrates is that there exist more and less

efficient approaches to communicating the same message. To con-

vey “00000100” requires eight bits. To convey the message “it only

rained on friday” requires five bits for each character in the mes-

sage. Since there are 24 characters in the message “it only rained

on friday” (letters as well as spaces), communicating the message

requires roughly 120 bits. (Note that I am deliberately keeping these

messages in all lower- case letters, as additional bits are required to

differentiate lowercase from uppercase letters.)



everything from laptop computers to mobile phones to the ubiquitous sensors connected throughout our environment that have come to be known as the Internet of Things. Put another way, Moore’s Law has al-lowed the digital world as we know it to come into being.

However, just as cooking is more about what you do in the kitchen than what kind of oven you have, the real power of digital computers has more to do with your strategy for using the computer to accom-plish a particular goal. Consider the fact that Charney and his team were able reduce the time required for a particular calculation from 24 hours to five minutes. That is a 30,000 percent (or 300x) improve-ment in speed in one year— much faster than Moore’s Law— driven primarily by improvements in computational strategy (code) rather than hardware. A recent research paper by Katja Grace of the Machine Intelligence Research Institute finds that this result is quite general.

60



60 The Advance of Code

1.E+15



1.E+14 MCR Linux Cluster

1.E+13

1.E+12 Dell 690

Cray 1

1.E+11

1.E+10

IBM 360

1.E+09

1.E+08

wer (units per second) 1.E+07 Abacus

1.E+06 (novice)

ENIAC

1.E+05

Computing po Thomas Burroughs 9

1.E+04 arithmometer

1.E+03

1.E+02

1.E+01

Manual

1.E+00

1850 1870 1890 1910 1930 1950 1970 1990 2010

FIGURE 4.1 The Progress of Computing Power Measured in Computations per Second (CPS). Notes: The measure shown here is the index of computing power. For a discussion of the definition, see the text. The series is defined so that manual computing has a value of one. The large circles are estimates that have been judged relatively reliable, and the small circles are estimates in the literature that have not been independently verified. The vertical line is placed at 1944, which is the esti-mated breakpoint in productivity growth.

Source: William Nordhaus (2007), “Two Centuries of Productivity Growth in Computing,” The Journal of Economic History, Vol. 67, No. 1 (March); pp. 143. Reprinted with permission of the publisher.

After assessing improvements in computation power in six specific areas, Grace found that “gains from algorithmic progress have been roughly fifty to one hundred percent as large as those from hardware progress.” Furthermore, she continues, “improvements tend to be in-cremental, forming a relatively smooth curve on the scale of years.”23

Grace’s findings take away nothing from the power of Moore’s Law: Moore’s Law describes the increased power of the platform on which computation takes place, whereas “Grace’s Law” describes in-creases in the power of the algorithms that run on that platform. The two are complementary.

61



Computers 61

Algorithmic progess of the type Katja Grace emphasizes is clearly an example of the advance of code. However, as I will describe more fully in chapter seven, the progress in hardware performance described by Moore’s Law is equally an example of the advance of code. Progress in hardware performance is the result of improvements in “the recipe” for producing computer chips, and these recipes have advanced pro-gressively in much the same way that recipes for producing Sumerian tablets improved more than five thousand years ago: through a relent-less process of systematic tinkering with the “how” of production. That sort of systematic tinkering has been the primary driver in the advance of code and, as a consequence, in the advance of economies for as long as human societies have existed.

Part One has been about the advance of code— what code is and how it has been manifested at different stages in history. Chiseled axes, writ-ing, culinary recipes, and the evolution of cities have all featured prom-inently. With the exception of Stone Age tools, they will, albeit in dif-ferent forms, continue to do so as I proceed.

In this chapter I have described the evolution of a variant of code that is particularly relevant to our historical moment: code stored and executed by digital computers. The combinatoric “logic of invention” envisioned by Leibniz— a language for performing differentiation and recombination in the realm of ideas— has become a reality. Its power is as great as or greater than any of humanity’s previous inventions, save perhaps writing and cities. The advance of code in the form of digital computation has enabled wonders like the accurate prediction of the weather, but it also has once again threatened to reduce individual au-thority and autonomy.

The power of digital computers is so great that a chess grandmaster was disqualified from a tournament in 2013 under suspicion of receiving computer- generated guidance via Morse code conveyed on his mobile phone.24 How long will it be before a doctor is accused of malpractice for employing his or her medical best judgment instead of following the course of action recommended by an algorithm? To what limits will we allow code not only to displace human workers but also to usurp human authority?

It is with these questions that I begin Part Two.

62



63





Part two




code economics Q



64





Substitution


Q 5

The Great Man- vs- Machine Debate



I am convinced, that the substitution of machinery for human labour, is often very injurious to the interests of the class of labourers.

— David Ricardo, On the Principles of Political Economy

and Taxation, 3rd edition, 1821



Fans of the Comedy Central series South Park will recall the 2004 “Goobacks” episode, in which Darryl Weathers calls a town meeting to protest the arrival of “The People from the Future”— immigrants fleeing overpopulation and poverty in the year 4035 who come to the town of South Park seeking work. (As they traveled back in time they accumulated goo on their backs— hence the name.) News reports de-scribe the aliens as “a hairless, uniform mix of all races” who speak a sort of guttural Esperanto. They soon demonstrate a willingness to per-form all manner of tedious jobs for low pay. “Now these people from the future are showing up and offering to do the same work for next to nothing,” Weathers complains to his fellow citizens. “They took our jerbs [tr. jobs]!” A chorus of voices then takes up the chant, “They took our jerbs!”

After the broadcast of “Goobacks,” the phrase “They took our jerbs!” took on a life of its own— which is to say, it became an Internet meme. A compilation of “They took our jerbs!” pronouncements from var-ious South Park episodes that was posted on YouTube in 2008 has



65

66



66 Code Economics

accumulated more than 1.4 million views and 4,700 comments over the past eight years.

This satiric South Park episode may have focused more on xenopho-bia than technophobia, but as a social commentary it is astute. It makes a fundamental and significant connection between immigration, arti-ficial intelligence (AI), and economic vulnerability. As futurist Kevin Kelly has observed:

AI could just as well stand for “Alien Intelligence” [as artificial intel-

ligence]. We have no certainty we’ll contact extra- terrestrial beings

from one of the billion earth- like planets in the sky in the next 200

years, but we have almost 100% certainty that we’ll manufacture

an alien intelligence by then. When we face these synthetic aliens,

we’ll encounter the same benefits and challenges that we expect from

contact with ET. They will force us to re- evaluate our roles, our be-

liefs, our goals, our identity. What are humans for? I believe our first

answer will be: humans are for inventing new kinds of intelligences

that biology could not evolve. Our job is to make machines that think

differently— to create alien intelligences. Call them artificial aliens.1

Over the past few years, the onslaught of “artificial aliens” has become a national obsession. Picking up on themes first explored nearly two cen-turies ago by Mary Shelley in her 1818 novel Frankenstein; or, The Modern Prometheus and in Karel Čapek’s 1920 science fiction play R.U.R.,2 and further developed in Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey and Ridley Scott’s dystopian masterpiece, Blade Runner, no fewer than a dozen major theatrical releases in the past two years have focused on the in-creasingly blurred boundary between man and machine— Robot and Frank, Her, The Imitation Game, Big Hero 6, Chappie, Avengers: Age of Ultron, and Ex Machina among them.3

Underlying the fascination with artificial aliens evidenced in pop-ular culture is a widespread sense of apprehension about the viability of human work in a world increasingly dominated by digital comput-ers. Entrepreneur and venture capitalist Marc Andreessen wrote in the Wall Street Journal in 2011, “Six decades into the computer revolution, four decades since the invention of the microprocessor, and two decades into the rise of the modern Internet, all of the technology required to

67



Substitution 67

transform industries through software finally works and can be widely delivered at global scale … More and more major businesses and indus-tries are being run on software and delivered as online services— from movies to agriculture to national defense. Software is eating the world.”4

As I noted in the Introduction to this book, recent observations regarding the impact of digital computing on the economy, and on human society more broadly, echo past debates on the impact of mech-anization. Ada Lovelace and Herbert Simon, already mentioned, were early participants in the Great Man- vs- Machine Debate, which also has engaged important contributors to the history of ideas, including David Ricardo, the early nineteenth- century economist about whom we’ll hear more shortly; John Maynard Keynes, who essentially invented the field of macroeconomics in the 1930s; Norbert Weiner, father of the field of robotics; and, most recently, Vint Cerf, co- inventor of the Transmission Control Protocol and the Internet Protocol (TCP/ IP), which is the core architecture of the Internet. All of these people and many more, whose insights I will seek to convey in the coming pages, grappled with the difficult balance human societies must always find between the benefits of technologically enabled disruption and its cost in terms of a loss of human authority and autonomy.

Among the illustrious figures who have called attention to the poten-tially disruptive impact of mechanization and automation, the first was neither an economist nor a technologist nor a mathematician. He was a poet, George Gordon Byron, better known as Lord Byron.

On February 27, 1812, Lord Byron delivered his first remarks before the House of Lords. The debate on that date concerned the Frame- Work Bill, which proposed that the destruction of mechanized looms known as stocking frames be deemed a capital felony, and hence punishable by death.

The Frame- Work Bill was prompted by a series of attacks on stock-ing frames that had begun in Nottinghamshire in November 1811. The attacks resembled similar acts of violence that had taken place in the French city of Lyon a decade earlier (see chapter three). The recent at-tacks were the work of a loose affiliation of textile artisans who called themselves the Luddites to suggest that they were followers of an imagi-nary Robin Hood- like character named General Ludd. Although the

68



68 Code Economics

Luddites’ violence against property was met with predictable oppro-brium among the Lords, their new member, Lord Byron, expressed sympathy for the Luddites and argued passionately against the imposi-tion of capital penalties for the destruction of mechanized looms.

“By the adoption of one species of frame in particular, one man performed the work of many, and the superfluous laborers were thrown out of employment,” Byron began. “Yet it is to be observed that the work thus executed was inferior in quality; not marketable at home, and merely hurried with a view to exportation.” While the domestic market could not absorb the significant increase in output enabled by the mechanized loom, overseas markets could. Byron made the claim that the mechanization of production further intensified the waste and suffering caused by the disruption of trade brought on by the Napoleonic Wars: “Although the adoption of the enlarged machinery in that state of commerce which the country once boasted might have been beneficial to the master without being detrimental to the servant; yet, in the present situation of our manufactures, without a prospect of exportation, with the demand for work and workmen equally di-minished, frames of this description tend materially to aggravate the distress and discontent of the disappointed sufferers.”

Lord Byron’s speech before the House of Lords on the Frame- Work Bill posed a fundamental question that has endured at the core of economic theory and in politics for two centuries: Is the adoption of “enlarged ma-chinery” in fact “beneficial to the master without being detrimental to the servant” in some or even most cases? Or is it instead the case, as Byron asserted, that the advance of code— in this case mechanization— results only “in the enrichment of a few individuals” while throwing “the work-man out of employment, and the laborer unworthy of his hire”?

In the field of economics, the Great Man- vs- Machine Debate began when one of the greatest figures in the history of economic thought changed his mind.

david ricardo was born in the City of London on April 18, 1772, the third of 17 children. His father, Abraham Ricardo, had emigrated to England from Holland in 1763 to expand the family’s stockbrokerage business. David was sent back to live in Holland from age nine to eleven to learn Dutch and increase his connection to the Portuguese Jewish com-munity there. When David was 14, his father brought him fully into the

69



Substitution 69

family business, where his responsibilities grew steadily. However, shortly after the family moved from London to the nearby town of Bow, David’s connection to his family was severed suddenly when he announced his engagement to a neighbor, Priscilla Ann Wilkinson, one of three daugh-ters of an eminent Quaker surgeon. Now on his own at the age of 21, Ricardo continued to work as a stockbroker and market speculator.

Ricardo was so successful in finance that he was semi-retired within a decade and free to dedicate much of his time to various intellectual pur-suits, including the study of geology and mathematics. When Priscilla Ricardo fell ill in March 1799, the Ricardos traveled to Bath so Priscilla could recuperate in one of the town’s famed spas. There he happened to spot a book by Adam Smith in a library and, after glancing through it briefly, requested that it be brought to his home. Priscilla Ricardo recovered, but the trajectory of her husband’s life was altered: from the moment he encountered The Wealth of Nations, the study of what we now call economics became David Ricardo’s primary preoccupation.

Ricardo’s first analytical effort in the field of economics was an anon-ymous essay entitled “The Price of Gold,” which was published in The Morning Chronicle in 1809. In the essay, Ricardo argued that directors of the Bank of England— of which he was one5— had been systemat-ically devaluing the English pound for their own gain.6 In 1813, when Parliament began to restrict trade in corn, Ricardo turned his attention from the debasement of the currency to the deleterious effects of trade restrictions. Here again he had the benefit of direct experience; he had, after all, been raised in two countries and spent a brief but lucrative career in the financial markets. The outcome of this effort was On the Principles of Political Economy and Taxation, published in 1817, a work of scope and significance comparable to Smith’s The Wealth of Nations. In Principles, Ricardo introduced the concept of comparative advan-tage, which remains the primary framework through which economists understand gains from trade.

Principles was the summation of the first attempts to understand what Ricardo and his contemporaries referred to as political economy. For these early “classical” political economists, the primary domain of production in human society was what it had been for millennia: ag-riculture. While agricultural code did advance substantially during the era when Ricardo and his direct predecessors were writing, the funda-mental technologies in use all involved one person using one piece of

70



70 Code Economics

durable equipment— a plow, a hoe, or a scythe— in some cases powered by horses or oxen.

Ricardo’s views on the primacy of land in the creation of wealth is evident from the first paragraph of the preface to Principles:

The produce of the earth— all that is derived from its surface by

the united application of labour, machinery, and capital, is divided

among three classes of the community; namely, the proprietor of the

land, the owner of the stock or capital necessary for its cultivation,

and the labourers by whose industry it is cultivated.

The Ricardian view of the division of the returns from production among landlords, owners of capital, and workers is summarized in a cliché about real estate investing (attributed alternately to Mark Twain and Will Rogers): “Buy land, they’re not making it any more.” Ricardo saw laborers in all countries caught in a trap: the more productive their work, the greater the increase in their numbers and the less their ulti-mate happiness. In the long run, workers only got enough to reproduce themselves while landlords got … an awful lot.

As a result of this reasoning, Ricardo was not initially sympathetic to the views articulated by Byron and others who worried about the impact of new code, embodied as machinery, on the well- being of workers. Like the other leading economists of his generation— notably the Reverend Thomas Malthus— Ricardo believed that little could be done to improve the condition of the undifferentiated laboring masses fundamentally so long as their inclination was to expand their families whenever resources allowed them to do so. The nature of the evolu-tion of work, and the possible substitution of machines for men in production, was not a question of great interest to Ricardo and other classical economists. If the introduction of new code were to increase national income by increasing productivity— that is, the output pie would grow— it would automatically increase the share of national income going to labor, as its slice of the pie would grow proportion-ately. Because proponents of this view held that the totality of wages were drawn from a national “fund” (a.k.a., slice of the pie) whose size would not change as the population changed, this line of argument became known as the wage fund theory (see Text Box 5.1).

71



Substitution 71



Text Box 5.1 The Wage Fund Theory

When the English and Scottish political economists— Adam Smith,

Jeremy Bentham, John Stuart Mill, the Reverend Thomas Malthus,

and David Ricardo foremost among them— first considered what

impact new machinery would have on the well- being of workers,

their starting point was the work of the first political economists,

the French Physiocrats. The Physiocrats’ theories were in turn moti-

vated by the dramatic, and generally positive, changes that occurred

in France prior to the revolution in 1789— one or two generations

before de Prony and Jacquard.

France at that time was a nation made prosperous from the bounty

of the land. It was the first country to develop a large- scale middle

class and the first to undergo the demographic phenomenon where

rapid population growth is accompanied by an increase in income

and a decrease in fertility rates. Agricultural production constituted

80 percent of France’s income. Not surprisingly, the Physiocrats’ view

of the functioning of the economy took the total amount of land as

a given, and assumed that it is from land that all wealth ultimately

derives. Using the notation “Output = F(Inputs)” to denote “output

is a function of ‘inputs,’ ” we can write the following relationship:

Output F Land, Labor, Capital = ( )

This equation says what happens in the process of agricultural pro-

duction: land, labor, and capital combine in specific quantities to

yield a specific quantity of output in the form of crops. It presumes

that the farmer employs some method of combining labor with land

and capital to yield the output. But the equation itself does not offer

any particulars regarding that method— that is, how production

takes place.

English and Scottish political economists largely accepted the

Physiocrats’ view of the economy as an essentially zero- sum game, one

in which national capital is fixed and its bounty is necessarily shared

within the population: land yields output, and that output is shared

between landowners, laborers, and merchants in fixed proportions.

72



72 Code Economics



In sharp contrast to the Physiocrats, however, the British classical

economists emphasized capital, rather than just land, as the produc-

tive wellspring from which national income derives. 7 Reflecting the

different composition of the British and French economies at that

time, the classical economists incorporated machinery into national

capital.

The classical view of the allocation of wealth in the economy is

summarized in the wage fund theory, which is expressed by the fol-

lowing relationship:

Wage = Capital

Population

Since the classical economists assumed that the stock of capital does

not change in response to changes in the wage rate paid to labor,8

a natural implication of this theory is that increases in population

naturally drive down wages, and vice versa.9

The notion that both population growth and decreased wages are

an inevitable consequence of increased “public prosperity” was devel-

oped two decades later by the Reverend Thomas Malthus in his 1798

book, An Essay on the Principle of Population. By adding the obser-

vation that increased income induces the poor to have more chil-

dren, Malthus arrived at his well- known formulation: “No sooner

is the laboring class comfortable again than the same retrograde

and progressive movements with respect to happiness are repeated.”

Humanity is doomed to alternating boom and bust cycles, driven

by the inverse relationship between population levels and per- capita

income.10

While the wage fund theory may have been esoteric in its con-

ception, it was nakedly brutal in its implementation. For one thing,

it implied that any attempt to “assist” the poor was not only futile

but counterproductive: any assistance provided to paupers in work-

houses constituted a withdrawal from a fixed national wage “fund,”

and thus necessarily implied there was less in the fund to compensate

employed laborers. The theory was made operational in the Poor

Laws of 1834, which created the poorhouses whose existence would

73



Substitution 73



be decried decades later by Charles Dickens.11 The miserable condi-

tions in the poorhouses were a matter not of accident but of care-

ful design: the intent was that life in the poorhouses should be so

unpleasant as to make wage labor of any type seem more appeal-

ing than public assistance. It was directly in response to the Poor

Laws that Dickens conceived the character of Ebenezer Scrooge in

A Christmas Carol. At one point in the story, two gentlemen raising

money for charity appear at the door of Scrooge’s counting house,

where he employs a single clerk, Bob Cratchit, as a human computer.

After a brief exchange, one of the gentlemen challenges Scrooge’s

support of the poorhouses, stating that “many can’t go there; and

many would rather die.” Scrooge replies, in a Malthusian manner, “If

they would rather die, they had better do it, and decrease the surplus

population.”



As Ricardo wrote in the first edition of Principles, “Capital is that part of the wealth of a country which is employed in production, and consists of food, clothing, tools, raw materials, machinery, &c. neces-sary to give effect to labour … In proportion to the increase of capital will be the increase in the demand for labour; in proportion to the work to be done will be the demand for those who are to do it.”12 Think, for example, of one person operating a single plow: there is no way for the plow to function without a human operator. Under the assumption that capital and labor thus are perfect complements, there is no way for machines to displace workers because the two are always used in fixed proportions.

Having thus ruled out, a priori, substitution between capital and labor, classical economists held the view that the wages earned by work-ers were determined by immutable laws of demography. More people competing for their share of the “wage fund” would always mean that each person earned less. Since humankind had not (at least up to the end of the eighteenth century) devised a systematic method for keep-ing the human population from growing, other than the brute force of biological necessity, wages would always and everywhere be forced down to subsistence levels by demographic pressures. As a result, life

74



74 Code Economics

was, as Hobbes famously noted, “nasty, brutish, and short.” Code was not part of the story.

Within a few years, however, Ricardo’s views had shifted. More than just a simple shift of opinion on an important public policy matter, his changing views on the Great Man- vs- Machine Debate anticipated a fundamental change in the way economists understood production, as agriculture gradually ceded to manufacturing the central role it had held in the economy for millennia.

Around the time Ricardo wrote On the Principles of Political Economy, the end of the Napoleonic Wars caused a disruption of the economies of Europe, with severe consequences. The miserable conditions of urban laborers and workers’ violent protests against the introduction of new machinery prompted a reconsideration of the wage fund theory. Could the introduction of automated production somehow constitute a threat to the well- being of workers?

The historical record confirms that the realities of the ongoing pro-cesses of mechanization and industrialization, as noted early on by Lord Byron, were very different from the picture adherents to the wage fund theory held in their heads. While the long- term impact the Industrial Revolution had on the health and well- being of the English population was strongly positive, the first half of the nineteenth century was indeed a time of exceptional hardship for English workers. In a study covering the years 1770– 1815, Stephen Nicholas and Richard Steckel report “falling heights of urban- and rural- born males after 1780 and a delayed growth spurt for 13- to 23- year- old boys,” as well as a fall in the English workers’ height relative to that of Irish convicts. 13 By the 1830s, the life expectancy of anyone born in Liverpool and Manchester was less than 30 years— as low as had been experienced in England since the Black Death of 1348.

Responding to these contemporary realities, John Barton, a Quaker political economist, published a pamphlet in 1817 titled, Observations on the Circumstances Which Influence the Condition of the Labouring Classes of Society. Rather than challenge the classical economists’ conclusions about the lived reality of industrialization, Barton challenged the as-sumptions on which the wage fund theory was based and indicated how this theory led to faulty conclusions. Barton began by targeting the Malthusian assumption that population grows in response to increasing

75



Substitution 75

wages. His argument is as straightforward as it was prescient. He began by noting that there was no a priori reason to believe that labor and capital were perfect complements, as classical economists implicitly as-sumed. The more sensible assumption was that, as wages increased, manufacturers and farmers alike would tend to substitute animals or machines for human labor.14 Rather than increasing the birth rate, the higher wages brought on by the introduction of new machinery would increase intergenerational differences in income and thus delay child-bearing.15 Contrary to the Malthusian line of argument, this is exactly what happened.

Ricardo read and was persuaded by Barton’s book. He considered the question of mechanization of such great importance that he added a new chapter, titled “On Machinery,” to the third edition of On the Principles of Political Economy. In an astonishing reversal, he wrote in 1821, “I now, however, see reason to be satisfied that the one fund, from which landlords and capitalists derive their revenue, may increase, while the other, that upon which the labouring class mainly depend, may diminish, and therefore it follows, if I am right, that the same cause which may increase the net revenue of the country, may at the same time render the population redundant, and deteriorate the condi-tion of the labourer.”16

However, this conclusion did not alter Ricardo’s view that soci-ety was improved by the adoption of improved machinery— and by the evolution of code with which it was inextricably linked. Linking his theories of trade with his observations about machinery, Ricardo noted that the most economically efficient machinery would cer-tainly be adopted somewhere in the world and the wage would be affected accordingly: “Machinery cannot be worked without the as-sistance of men, it cannot be made but with the contribution of their labour.”17

By incorporating the potential for substitution between capital and labor, Ricardo led the field of economics in rejecting the wage fund theory, along with its Dickensian implications for policy. He accepted the notion the introduction of new machinery would result in the dis-placement of workers. The upshot was that the workers were still as-sumed to be doomed, but the reason was now substitution of machines for labor, not scarcity of a Malthusian variety.

76



76 Code Economics

With that, the Great Man- vs- Machine Debate intensified, ushering in a wholesale change in the way economists thought of code, workers, and the returns from productive activity in the economy.

Nearly four decades later and six thousand miles away, the Great Man- vs- Machine Debate took another sharp turn, setting it on a direct course to the present day.

In the fall of 1868, the city of San Francisco was flush with anticipa-tion, as the First Transcontinental Railroad (also known as the Pacific Railroad) was within months of completion. However, not all be-lieved that the coming of the railroad would bring greater prosperity. Among the skeptics was a 29- year- old typesetter named Henry George. George’s work further challenged the classical economists’ wage fund theory and introduced a new dimension to the Great Man- vs- Machine Debate that today resonates powerfully amid current controversies over the relationship between prosperity and inequality.

George worked for the San Francisco Times, in which he published an editorial in late 1868 titled, “What the Railroads Will Bring Us.” Much like those today who are concerned about the social inequities brought on by the advance of digital technologies, George was concerned about the social inequity the advance of the railroad would bring. George began his piece by noting that “the California of the new era will be greater, richer, more powerful than the California of the past … She will have more wealth; but will it be so evenly distributed? She will have more luxury and refinement and culture; but will she have such general comfort, so little squalor and misery?” His answer to these two questions was a resounding “no.” With the coming of the railway, George predicted, California’s fate would be the “crowding of people into immense cities” and “marshaling of men into big gangs under the control of ‘captains of industry,’ ” neither of which “tend to foster per-sonal independence— the basis of all virtue.” He concluded: “A great change is coming over our State. We should not prevent it if we could, and could not if we would, but we can view it in all its bearings— look at the dark as well as the bright side, and endeavor to hasten that which is good and retard or prevent that which is bad.”18 George’s editorial hit a nerve. It was widely read and reprinted at the time, and was required reading in California schools for decades to come.

77



Substitution 77

In 1871, three years after publication of “What the Railroads Will Bring Us,” George stopped to rest while on a horseback ride and sat overlooking San Francisco Bay. He later recalled the revelation he ex-perienced: “I asked a passing teamster, for want of something better to say, what land was worth there. He pointed to some cows grazing so far off that they looked like mice and said, ‘I don’t know exactly, but there is a man over there who will sell some land for a thousand dollars an acre.’ Like a flash it came over me that there was the reason of advanc-ing poverty with advancing wealth. With the growth of population, land grows in value, and the men who work it must pay more for the privilege.”19

George set about putting his insight into words. The task would take him the remainder of that decade and would bring his family to the brink of bankruptcy more than once. The book he ultimately completed and self- published in 1879 was titled Progress and Poverty. It would become the most commercially successful book ever published by an American up to that time, selling more than two million copies worldwide.

Progress and Poverty generalized the observations George had made earlier about the coming of the railroad. Anticipating by 150 years the theories of Jane Jacobs and the findings of the Santa Fe team that I de-scribed in chapter two, George asserted that increasing population density (not, as Malthus claimed, population decline) was the source of increased prosperity in human societies: “Wealth is greatest where population is densest … the production of wealth to a given amount of labor increases as population increases.”20 The frequent interac-tions among people in densely populated cities accelerates the emer-gence and evolution of code. However, while population growth and increased density naturally bring increased prosperity, they also, just as naturally, bring increasing inequality and poverty. Why? Because the fruits of labor are inevitably gathered by the owners of land. “That [the] increasing productive power [of industry] does not add to the reward of labor is not because of competition, but because competition is one- sided,” he writes. “Land, without which there can be no production, is monopolized, and the competition of producers for its use forces wages to a minimum and gives all the advantage of increasing produc-tive power to land owners, in higher rents and increased land values.”21

78



78 Code Economics

In sharp contrast with Karl Marx, whose Das Kapital appeared more than a decade before Progress and Poverty, George stated that “the antag-onism of interests is not between labor and capital … but is in reality between labor and capital on the one side and land ownership on the other.”22 The implication of his analysis was as simple as it was power-ful: to avoid concentrating wealth in the hands of the few, it was the government’s responsibility to eliminate all taxes on capital and labor, the productive elements of the economy, and to replace those taxes with a single tax on land. Thus the Single Tax movement was born.

The Single Tax movement was far larger and more influential in its day than the recent Tea Party and Occupy movements combined. With adherents across the United States and around the world, the move-ment even spawned its own journal, The Single Tax Review, which was founded in 1901 (four years after George’s death) and remained in print continually until 1921.

The first round of the Great Man- vs- Machine Debate focused on mechanization. In that domain, the verdict of history was clear: ma-chines turned out to be complements to human labor, not pure sub-stitutes. This verdict is sufficiently conclusive that the argument to the contrary, exemplified by Lord Byron’s remarks to the House of Lords, has come to be known as the Luddite Fallacy.

Generally we know that, from the mid- nineteenth century onward, the Industrial Revolution in England dramatically increased both wages and the standard of living for workers. In the aggregate, when work-ers left their villages to work in urban factories, inevitably submitting to the authority of managerially enforced code in their jobs and to the various constraints of urban life, the increased productive efficiency achieved by the advance of code did lead to genuine improvements in the median level of well- being, even if those improvements were inequitably distributed, as Henry George predicted. As George Mason University economist Alex Tabarrok has put it, “[If] the Luddite fallacy were true we would all be out of work because productivity has been increasing for two centuries.”23

The generally beneficial impact on human communities of human labor being displaced by machines and factory workers by automated assembly is a matter of historical record. But what of cubicle dwellers

79



Substitution 79

displaced by digital computers? Is there any reason to believe that his-tory will repeat itself? Will further concessions of individual autonomy in the service of increased efficiency continue to yield gains sufficiently large to improve median levels of well- being? If so, are we willing to accept the increasing inequality the continued advance of code will likely create? History’s adverse judgment against the Luddites notwith-standing, these are serious questions. As former treasury secretary Larry Summers wrote in the Wall Street Journal regarding the displacement of workers due to digital disruption, “There are more sectors losing jobs than creating jobs. And the general- purpose aspect of software tech-nology means that even the industries and jobs that it creates are not forever.”24 How can this be a positive development?

While these questions do not have easy answers, history does provide some guidance. Ours is not the first era in which people performing mental labor have faced threats to their livelihood due to automation. Eighteenth- and nineteenth- century countinghouse clerks— embodied in Charles Dickens’ creation Bob Cratchit— toiled endlessly at stand-ing desks performing arithmetical calculations. With the advent of the first adding machines, notably the Burroughs (see figure 5.1), the work of these clerks could be performed by people with far less training and natural computational acuity. By the 1920s it was no longer just arti-sans and laborers whose livelihoods were considered in jeopardy due to mechanization; clerical workers were at risk as well.

In 1926, University of Chicago economist Paul Douglas published an article in System: The Magazine of Business— the Forbes of the era— titled “What Is Happening to the ‘White- Collar- Job’ Market?” Douglas described a peculiar and potentially alarming trend: the wages of factory workers were catching up to the wages earned by salaried white- collar workers. This fact was peculiar because the growth rate of white- collar work during the interval Douglas studied, 1889 to 1922, was twice the rate for factory work. Given this strong growth in relative demand for white- collar workers, one might have expected correspondingly strong wage growth; the data instead revealed a mod-erate wage decline. The convergence of white- collar salaries and factory wages was potentially alarming, as white- collar work required a higher level of education than factory work and was viewed as a path toward a new, relatively more comfortable version of the middle- class life. With

80





FIGURE 5.1 “Why the Burroughs is a Necessity.” This image is reproduced

from a book published by the Burroughs Corporation in 1910, describing the his-

tory and societal impacts of the Burroughs Adding Machine. The left- hand side

image is a facsimile of a set of figures added by hand, stated to require an average

clerk 9 minutes to complete; the right- hand side is a facsimile of a set of figures

added with a Burroughs Adding Machine, stated to require 1.5 minutes for an

average operator to complete. Regardless of the accuracy of the time estimates, the

key point is that the use of the Burroughs Adding Machine required considerably

less training and mental acuity than adding the figures by hand.

Source: Burroughs Corporation (1910), “A Better Day’s Work at a Less Cost of

Time, Work, and Worry to the Man at the Desk,” Detroit, MI: Burroughs Adding

Machine Company. Digitized by Google.

81



Substitution 81

the erosion of white- collar advantages then in process, Douglas warned that “not too many years in the future we may find the situation per-manently like that of 1918– 20, when the wage- earner [that is, factory worker] was frequently making more money than the office employee. Then the only advantage to the office job will be that of working in a white, clean collar instead of a pair of greasy overalls.”25 Analyzing the data, Douglas found three reasons for this convergence of white- collar salaries and factory wages. The first was simply that, while demand for white- collar workers had grown rapidly, the supply of white- collar workers had grown even more rapidly. This was due to a combination of workers’ preference for clerical over factory jobs and an increase in workers’ educational attainment, which created a larger pool of candi-dates for white- collar work. (Recent labor market dynamics in China have shown a similar trend.)26

The second reason had to do with machinery, as Douglas noted: “The increased use of mechanical appliances in offices has tended to lower the skill required. An old- fashioned bookkeeper, for instance, had to write a good hand, he had to be able to multiply and divide with ab-solute accuracy. Today his place is taken by a girl who operates a book-keeping machine, and it has taken her a few weeks at most to become a skilled bookkeeper.” In other words, the introduction of machinery displaced skilled workers for the very same reason it enhanced human capabilities: it allowed a worker with relatively rudimentary training to perform tasks that previously required a skilled worker.

There is more to the story, however. Douglas continues: “Another way of looking at it, is this: Where formerly the skill used in bookkeep-ing was exercised by the bookkeeper, today that skill is exercised by the factory employees who utilize it to manufacture a machine which can do the job of keeping books, when operated by someone of skill far below that of the former bookkeeper. And because of this transfer of skill from the office to the factory, the rewards of skill are likewise transferred to the wage- earner at the plant.”

This is a vitally important point, to which I will return later in the book. The essence of this insight is that introducing more powerful ma-chines into the workplace does more than simply encode into the ma-chine the skills or capabilities that previously resided only in humans; it also shifts the burden of skill from one domain of work to another. As

82



82 Code Economics

Douglas reported, one such shift in the early twentieth century was from the skill of bookkeeping to the skill of manufacturing a calculating ma-chine; the result was a relative growth in manufacturing wages. A com-parable shift in recent decades has been from the skill of manufacturing computing machines (think IBM or Dell in their heydays) to that of cre-ating improved instructions for computing machines; the result has been a relative growth in programmers’ wages. The underlying process is the same. Improvements in technology will predictably reduce demand for the skills held by some workers, but they also will enhance the capabili-ties of other workers and shift the requirement of skill from one domain of work to another. (Later work by Douglas, in collaboration with the mathematician John Cobb, set the stage for the modern study of produc-tivity and capital- labor substitution in the economy; see Text Box 5.2.)

In the manner described by Paul Douglas, work divides or “bifur-cates” as code advances in a predictable and repeatable way. The bifur-cation of work is a critical mechanism by which the advance of code yields improvements in human well- being at the same time it increases human reliance on code.

In this chapter I have described economists’ first efforts to represent production processes and quantify the importance of code. In the next chapter I will describe how economists’ efforts to understand the ori-gins of organized commerce and novelty in economic systems finds a direct parallel in biologists’ efforts to understand the origins of life and novelty in biological systems.27

Before we move on, a brief postscript to the story of Lord Byron, Charles Babbage, and Ada Lovelace, which anticipates themes in the next chapter concerning the challenge posed to the most highly edu-cated workers by the “immigrants from the future” to whom I alluded at the start of this chapter— or, more precisely, the machine learning algorithms and digitally enabled systems for artificial intelligence that are today at the frontier of the advance of code.

In 1957, Herbert Simon delivered a talk to the Operations Research Society. He observed with delight “that physicists and electrical engi-neers had very little to do with the invention of the digital computer— the real inventor was the economist Adam Smith, whose idea was trans-lated into hardware through successive stages of development by two

83



Substitution 83



Text Box 5.2 The Cobb- Douglas Production Function

While lecturing at Amherst College in the spring of 1927,

Paul Douglas began work on a paper titled simply, “A Theory of

Production.” At that time, Douglas had laboriously compiled data

on American manufacturing during the interval from 1889 to

1922, including the total capital in use, the number of wage earn-

ers employed in manufacturing, and manufacturing output. When

Douglas plotted the data, he noticed an unexpected regularity: the

relative shares of capital and labor in output were consistent across

the entire interval. Working with mathematician Charles Cobb, he

determined that the data throughout the period covered by his study

could be well represented by a variant of a generalized production

function linking capital (K) and labor (L) inputs to produced output

(Y). The specific variant that fit the data was the following:

Y 0 25 0 75 . . = K • L

Cobb and Douglas arrived at this particular functional form because

it was known to have properties consistent with some commonsense

reasoning about the economy. Specifically, this function exhibits

“constant returns to scale,” which means it describes a situation in

which doubling all of the inputs into the production process (in this

case, capital and labor) results in exactly double the output. In 1928

they published their joint work in the American Economic Review,

the journal of the American Economic Association.28

That the Cobb- Douglas production function fit the data for

manufacturing inputs and outputs was not what made it interesting.

What was interesting was that the Cobb- Douglas estimates validated

a particular theoretically derived prediction about the way output

was shared by capitalists and laborers. The validated theory is today

known as the “Just Deserts” theory of distribution in economics—

which, although the spelling here is correct, might intuitively and by

way of analogy make more sense if spelled “just desserts.”

First advanced by John Bates Clark (namesake of the American

Economic Association’s annual award to an outstanding econo-

mist under the age of 40, the second most prestigious award in

84



84 Code Economics



economics, after the Nobel Prize) in an address to the American

Economic Association in 1888, the Just Deserts theory states that

the distribution of output going to labor as opposed to capital is— in

an economy free of “distortions” such as the bargaining power of

labor unions or collusion among capitalists— determined by the fun-

damentals of technology. In his classic 1899 book, The Distribution

of Wealth, Clark sums up the theory:

It is the purpose of this work to show that the distribution of the income of society is controlled by a natural law, and that this law, if it worked without friction, would give to every agent of production the amount of wealth which that agent creates. However wages may be adjusted by bargains freely made between individual men, the rates of pay that result from such transactions tend, it is here claimed, to equal that part of the product of industry which is traceable to the labor itself; and however interest may be adjusted by similarly free bargain-ing, it naturally tends to equal the fractional product that is separately traceable to capital.

An additional hour added to the pool of labor is rewarded in accor-

dance with the contribution that additional hour makes to output;

the same is true with capital. As this additional, or “marginal,” prod-

uct of labor goes up, wages go up; as the additional, or “marginal,”

product of capital goes up, rates of return to capital go up. To both

labor and capital the implication is clear: you get what you get and

you don’t get upset.

If Cobb and Douglas’ estimates were correct, then the Just Deserts

theory predicted that 75 percent of output of production during the

interval from 1899 to 1922 should have gone to workers— where the

75 percent corresponds directly to the 0.75 exponent in the above

function. The actual value? 74.1 percent. The absolute magnitudes of

capital and labor thus determined the size of the total output pie, while

the coefficients of the Cobb- Douglas production function determined

the size of the slices going to capital and labor— 25.9 percent of output

went to capital owners and 74.1 percent was paid to workers as wages.

85



Substitution 85



The fact that Cobb and Douglas’ estimates matched the wealth data

so closely was a major validation of neoclassical production theory.

Nonetheless, as Douglas himself would later report, his paper with

Charles Cobb “was very adversely received … Virtually no one had a

good word for our efforts.”

Over time, however, the approach Cobb and Douglas pioneered

gained favor. By the 1950s, the general form of the function they

had estimated in their 1928 paper became a mainstay of both empir-

ical and theoretical economics. While it since has been superseded

in economic theory by more complex and flexible functional forms,

variants of the Cobb- Douglas production function remain the

default framework for most empirical production analyses.



mathematicians, Prony and Babbage.” Simon then recounted the tale of de Prony and the hairdressers that I related in chapter three, concluding that “it was Prony’s mass production of the mathematical tables … that suggested to Babbage that machinery could replace human labor in the clerical phases of the task, and that started him on the undertaking of designing and constructing an automatic calculating engine.”29

Seven years earlier, in 1950, Simon had given a talk to a group of business executives in which he focused on the advent of digital computers— then only five years old— that recalled the insights of Paul Douglas. Referring to advances in digital computing, Simon stated that, “in describing these developments, which are now engrossing the ef-forts of … scientists in a dozen locations, I do not wish to create undue anxiety about [the] prospective obsolescence [of business executives]. Before today’s business executives take their place with the mastodons, quite a span of years, if not generations, is likely to elapse. Nevertheless, I think it is fair to regard these researches … as portents that we are in time going to have a theory in management— theory of the kind that predicts reality, and not of the kind that is contrasted with practice.”30

If the business executives in attendance were discomfited by Simon’s suggestion that digital machinery could progressively replace their labor, they might have taken comfort in the observations of Babbage’s collaborator, Ada Lovelace. As you will recall, while Lovelace specifically

86



86 Code Economics

envisioned that computers could be used to write poetry or music— in fact could compose “elaborate and scientific pieces of music of any degree of complexity”— she did not believe that computers would be capable of human thought or of undertaking higher- order tasks. “The Analytical Engine has no pretension whatever to originate anything,” she wrote. “It can do whatever we know how to in order to perform. It can only follow analysis; but it has not power of anticipating any ana-lytical relations or truths.” Alan Turing would later term this assertion “Lady Lovelace’s Objection.”

Where modern- day inheritors of the argument advanced by Lord Byron before the House of Lords have kept alive his concern that au-tomation of work results only “in the enrichment of a few individuals” while it throws “the workman out of employment, and the laborer un-worthy of his hire,” Ada Lovelace posthumously counters these con-cerns by insisting on the existence of a boundary to the advance of arti-ficial intelligence— a line beyond which human cognition, experience, and creativity cannot be simulated by any computer.

In the Great Man- vs- Machine Debate, Byron and Lovelace thus, ironically, end up occupying opposite ends of the spectrum— followers of Byron arguing that the ability to substitute machines for human work is all but unbounded, and those of Lovelace arguing to the contrary. Why the irony? Because Ada Lovelace was Lord Byron’s daughter.31





Information


Q 6

“Reliable Circuits Using Crummy Relays”



Philosophy is written in that great book which ever is before our eyes— I mean the universe— but we cannot understand it if we do not first learn the language and grasp the symbols in which it is written.

—Galileo Galilei, The Systems of the World, 1661



On January 5, 2015, on the second day of the annual meeting of the American Economic Association, extreme overcrowding at one ses-sion prompted the appearance of a Boston police officer. The officer promptly directed a number of participants to vacate the room to ensure compliance with the fire code.

What exceptional offering prompted this frenzy among economists? The session in question was titled, “Machine Learning Methods in Economics and Econometrics.” The session did have some star power from the standpoint of the economics profession, as panelists included Stanford’s Susan Athey, the 2007 recipient of the John Bates Clark Medal and the former chief consulting economist for Microsoft, as well as Harvard’s Sendhil Mullainathan, a groundbreaking behavioral economist. However, the real draw of the session was that it was one of the few in which the application to economics of the emerging field of data analytics— or Big Data— took center stage.

To put this session in context, let’s start with the term featured in its title, “machine learning.” Machine learning finds answers based on computationally intensive but efficient pattern matching.1 An example



87

88



88 Code Economics

is Google Translate. Rather than mimic the process of human language acquisition, Google Translate employs a technique known as statistical machine translation. This technique involves first gathering a “training dataset” comprised of as much text as possible previously translated from one language to another, and then undertaking a thorough com-putational analysis of that translated text to arrive at a raw probability that a specific phrase or sentence in Language A— really, just a string of characters— corresponds to another specific phrase or sentence in Language B. That information is stored until someone types a phrase or sentence into Google Translate, at which point the program offers up the most likely corresponding phrase or sentence.

Google Translate doesn’t “know” anything about grammar, syntax, or even vocabulary, and it doesn’t attempt understanding at that level. It simply offers responses based on probable matches, based on large datasets, all previously created by human intelligence. The hour- by- hour weather predictions we can now access on our cell phones are generated the same way. Machine learning works well for translation and weather prediction— for now, better than any automated translator or weatherman that is based on the sort of brain- mimicking architec-ture envisioned by early artificial intelligence programmers like Herbert Simon and Al Newell.

Machine learning pioneer Leslie Valiant described the approach in his 1984 paper, “A Theory of the Learnable.” “Humans appear to be able to learn new concepts without needing to be programmed explicitly in any conventional sense,” Valiant observed. “In this paper we regard learning as the phenomenon of knowledge acquisition in the absence of explicit programming.”2 This process begins when “the learner has access to a supply of typical data that positively exemplify the concept,” which is the training dataset. Using the training dataset, the machine learning algorithm matches patterns and estimates relevant probabili-ties. Additional test datasets can be used to evaluate and improve the performance of the algorithm.

Let us consider what it might mean for the field of economics that the “Machine Learning” session was so overcrowded— mostly with graduate students seeking insights into the new techniques shaping the future of economics. While the patterns sought by machine- learning algorithms may well begin as questions derived from theory, once the

89



Information 89

algorithms take over, theory and even detailed simulation take a back seat, as the algorithm and the data tell their own stories.

Of course, as noted data journalist Nate Silver is quick to point out, “no amount of data is a substitute for scientific inference and hypoth-esis testing, any kind of structured analysis of a system.” Nonetheless, the introduction and rapid uptake of machine learning in economics places code at the center of economic inquiry as never before, and it challenges long- held notions of expertise and methodological validity. David Rothkopf, CEO and editor of Foreign Policy, recently wrote a piece for that publication titled “Requiem for the Macrosaurus,” in which he stated:

Whereas today’s economic models rely on a relative handful of vari-

ables, future models will be able to utilize a limitless number, creat-

ing opportunities for policymakers to develop new tools. Many of

these new models and tools will require not the insights of micro-

economists, but those of nano- economists, superspecialists in the

relationship between much smaller economic units and the larger

economy as a whole. New economic theories will also emerge based

on growing sources of real- time data about every aspect of markets

and the factors affecting them— and new, ever more powerful tools

will be created for analyzing that data.3

But if macroeconomists— the “Macrosauruses” in Rothkopf’s piece— sense that their authority is being challenged by the power of these new analytic techniques in this manner, they can take comfort in the fact that they are not alone. Speaking at the National Academy of Sciences in 2015, University of Chicago economist and Freakonomics coauthor Steven Levitt noted, echoing Herbert Simon’s remarks to a group of executives in 1950: “It’s a very hard world for business— and I think also policy makers— to transform into, where the role of the executive goes from being, ‘I am the expert, who knows everything,’ to my job being ‘Can I ask the right questions and can I marshal the right data and tell me what the answers are to those questions?’ ”4

The application of code to business decision- making represents the latest chapter in the evolution of code and learning— one that is chang-ing not only the field of economics but the economy itself.

90



90 Code Economics

“The density of settlement of economists over the whole empire of economic science is very uneven, with a few areas of modest size hold-ing the bulk of the population,” Herbert Simon observed in his 1978 Nobel lecture. “The economic Heartland is the normative study of the international and national economies and their markets, with its triple main concerns of full employment of resources, the efficient allocation of resources, and equity in distribution of the economic product.”5 In contrast to this crowded “Heartland” in which questions about the al-location and distribution of resources dominated, the domain of study relating to the actual behavior of business firms— the creative actors whose existence largely defines “the economy,” in contrast to human society more broadly— until World War II represented a remote and sparsely settled colony. “Such inhabitants as it had were mainly indus-trial engineers, students of public administration, and specialists in business functions, none of whom especially identified themselves with the economic sciences. Prominent pioneers included the mathemati-cian, Charles Babbage, inventor of the digital computer, the engineer, Frederick Taylor, and the administrator, Henri Fayol.”6

However, Simon continued, “during World War II, this territory, almost abandoned, was rediscovered by scientists, mathematicians, and statisticians concerned with military management and logistics, and was renamed ‘operations research’ or ‘operations analysis.’ So remote were the operations researchers from the social science community that economists wishing to enter the territory had to establish their own colony, which they called ‘management science.’ ”7 Management sci-ence is distinguished from economics in the Heartland by its focus on code: “These are theories of how to decide rather than theories of what to decide.”8

Simon’s Nobel Prize citation noted his work on “bounded rational-ity,” a phrase Simon himself coined and around which he organized his contributions to economics. However, this phrase, much like Simon’s metaphor of the Heartland versus the colonies, suggests a marginaliza-tion of systematic inquiry into the how of production rather than the what, and of the fundamental information processing that underlies all decision- making.

That Simon felt himself to be marginalized among economists— despite the fact that he had just been awarded a Nobel Prize in

91



Information 91

economics— is actually understandable. For one thing, he considered himself not an economist but a behavioral scientist. For another, he had little patience for those who failed to grasp truths that he himself saw as obvious. Furthermore, the trend of the discipline in the 1970s was strongly toward neoclassical choice models that emphasized the al-location of resources under assumptions of perfect information— and that mostly disregarded the algorithms of production that were his preoccupation.

That said, if we consider the discipline of economics in the con-text of broader trends in scientific inquiry in the twentieth century, we see the “sparsely populated” intellectual territory inhabited by Herbert Simon, Charles Babbage, and Frederick Taylor for what it really was at the time Simon delivered his Nobel address: the frontier.

The economics taught in undergraduate courses is a great example of history being written by the victors. Because the methodologies of neoclassical economics experienced numerous triumphs in the middle of the twentieth century, the study of the distribution of resources within the economy— choice rather than code and, to a lesser extent, consumption rather than production— came to be taught as the total-ity of economics. However, the reality is that choice and code have always coexisted, not only in the economy itself but in the history of economic thought.

The tendency toward selective memory among economists is no-where better illustrated than in the story of William Jevons, widely recognized as one of three original architects of neoclassical choice theory— a father of modern economics.

Like David Ricardo, Jevons was first motivated to take up the study of economics by reading Adam Smith’s Wealth of Nations. Also like Ricardo, Jevons devoted his twenties to business pursuits. Those experi-ences left him with a first- hand appreciation of the complex working of markets and, in turn, of the singular power of mathematics to sim-plify and organize a complex world.9 “Such is the infinite complexity of causes and of effect that we cannot treat them in detail … Economy, indeed, being concerned with quantities, has always of necessity been mathematical in its subject, but the strict and general statement, and the easy comprehension of its quantitative laws has been prevented by

92



92 Code Economics

neglect of those powerful methods of expression which have been ap-plied to most other sciences with so much success.”10

The preferred tool of the time was optimization, using calculus. The use of calculus, along with the fundamental framing of economic expe-rience as dominated by the need to make choices about the allocation of resources, led Jevons to devise the tools of marginal analysis that became the core of the new classical or neoclassical economic theory that is taught today in college courses.

And here the story usually ends. However, there was much more to Jevons.

Like his contemporary, Henry George, Jevons sought throughout his life to make sense of the fundamental contradiction in the history of his native city: evident progress on a societal level juxtaposed against wide variation in the fortunes of individuals and groups within that society.

Jevons was born in Liverpool on September 1, 1835, the son of an iron merchant and an artistically inclined mother. The city’s rapid growth during the seventeenth century had been fueled by its central role in the slave trade. When slavery was abolished in the British Empire in 1807, anxiety among citizens over the city’s future ran deep 11 . Forecasts of impending doom for Liverpool turned out to be ill- founded, how-ever, as trade with the American colonies grew rapidly and filled the economic void left by the abolition of slavery. Indeed, from 1807 to the time Jevons was born, the volume of shipping flowing through the port of Liverpool more than doubled.

And yet, while both the city’s population and workers’ wages in-creased steadily, a severe economic rift occurred that separated the haves from the have- nots. As wealthy Liverpudlians moved away from the docks to newly fashionable districts on the edges of the city, those left behind in the center of town faced miserable conditions. From 1830 to 1850, life expectancy actually decreased in Liverpool proper from an already miserable 32 years to a shocking 25 years.

Faced with these realities, Jevons was highly sensitive to the inequi-ties of the nineteenth- century system of industrial organization, rhe-torically asking in his 1870 essay, “Does not every one feel that there is an evil at work which needs remedy? Does not the constant occurrence of strikes, and the rise of vast and powerful organisations of workmen, show that there is some profound unfitness in the present customs of

93



Information 93

the country to the progress of affairs?” Arguing for the imperative of in-stitutional innovation as eloquently as any modern advocate of equity, Jevons stated, “If the masters insist on retaining their ancient customs; if they will shroud their profits in mystery, and treat their men as if they were another class of beings, whose interests are wholly separate and opposite; I see trouble in the future as in the past.”12

While Jevons shared modern neoclassical economists’ views that labor unions tended to restrict employment, he nonetheless saw unions as positive social institutions, stating that “association of some kind or other is alike the sign and means of civilisation.”13 Rather than ban or crush unions, as was widely advocated by his contemporaries, he pro-posed instead to create “a more useful and beneficial form of organiza-tion” based on profit- sharing, which he alternately termed a “partner-ship” or a “co- operative”:

I hope to see the time when workmen will be to a great extent their

own capitalists … I believe that a movement of workmen towards

co- operation in the raising of capital would be anticipated by em-

ployers admitting their men to a considerable share of their profits.14

Compared with the default system in which industrial inequities were addressed by the actions of labor unions and arbitration boards, a system based on profit- sharing cooperatives would have the advantage of aligning the interests of factory owners and workers. Anticipating modern contract theory by a full century, Jevons observes that “in every work there are a thousand opportunities where the workman can either benefit or injure the establishment.” He continues: “Could [the worker] really be made to feel his interests identical with those of his employ-ers, there can be no doubt that the profits of the trade could be greatly increased in many cases.” He concludes: “Partnerships of industry are, no doubt, an innovation, having hitherto existed only in exceptional trades and rare experiments; but I assert confidently that they are an in-novation of which the utility is evident and the necessity urgent.”15

Whom does Jevons credit with having originated the idea of the profit- sharing cooperative? None other than the inventor of the Difference Engine and early code economist, Charles Babbage. “It does not seem to be so generally known as it ought to be that, as far as can

94



94 Code Economics

be ascertained, the real author of the system I am advocating is Mr. Charles Babbage,” he writes. “Nearly forty years ago his admirable work ‘The Economy of Manufactures’ was published, and it is truly difficult to overrate the genius which it displays.”16

Regarding matters of economic theory rather than public policy, Jevons was as strongly influenced by the pioneering evolutionary theo-rist Herbert Spencer (see Text Box 1.1) as he was by the great classical economist Adam Smith. Matching Spencer in audacity but differing from him in methods, Jevons sought to discover and articulate natu-ral laws through the application of mathematics and logic. This im-pulse led Jevons to invent the world’s first machine capable of proving theorems— a successor to Babbage’s Difference Engine, and a direct antecedent to Simon and Newell’s pioneering Logic Theorist, or LT program (see Text Box 3.2).

In sum, while the contributions William Jevons made to neoclassi-cal choice theory are a matter of historical record, even this architect of textbook economics was also, and importantly, a code economist.

Textbook economics became what it is today during the tumul-tuous 1930s, more than 80 years ago, as the battle between Fascism and Communism raged in Spain and threatened to erupt elsewhere in Europe. Surrounded by severe and seemingly worsening political polar-ization, a group of young academics (mostly at the London School of Economics, where Jevons taught, and at Cambridge University) sought admirably to steer economics away from subjectivity and ideology and toward objectivity and science. Their vision was to invoke the power of logical positivism, an approach toward the advance of understanding based on the power of deductive logic.

The project of the logical positivists working in mathematics— notably Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead— was similar to that which had led Jevons to invent a theorem- proving machine: to organize all mathematical understanding as the derived implications of a few core axioms. Taking inspiration from Russell and Whitehead, these vanguard economists sought to undertake, in the words of Nobel Laureate John Hicks, “a purge of economic theory” that eliminated all assertions that could not be justified as derived implications from axiomatic foundations.

95



Information 95

In the intervening 80 years, the project of re- creating all of econom-ics by deriving theories from core axioms and, where possible, testing them empirically— a project that came to be known as the neoclassical revolution in economics— has been successful along multiple dimen-sions. However, the same was not true of the logical positivist project in mathematics spearheaded by Russell and Whitehead. Indeed, even as the neoclassical revolution in economics was just getting started, German mathematician Kurt Gödel was publishing a paper proving that the logical positivist project in mathematics contained an irrecon-cilable self- contradiction and thus was doomed to fail. The publication of Gödel’s theorem immediately disrupted the field of mathematics. New theories— from the Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle to funda-mental discoveries made by Andrey Kolmogorov, Claude Shannon, Norbert Wiener, and Alan Turing— followed in its wake and came to define the core of scientific inquiry. Together they formed the founda-tion of a domain of inquiry that has come to be known as information theory.

Information theory places the problem of communication at the center of technological, biological, and social processes. A classic paper of Claude Shannon’s, titled “Reliable Circuits Using Crummy Relays,” serves to illustrate the practical application. At the time that Shannon wrote, large- scale communications networks (like the telephone system run by the Bell Telephone Company, Shannon’s employer) comprised hundreds of thousands of error- prone components. The challenge was: How to encode the human voice, transmit it across the country, and decode it intelligibly at the receiver’s end, using such a network of imperfect components— the “crummy relays” in the title of Shannon’s paper.17

To get into the details of the problem, consider the diagram sketched by Claude Shannon decades ago, reproduced in figure 6.1. In his out-standing book, The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood, James Gleick summarizes Shannon’s model as follows:

A communication system must contain the following elements:

(1) The information source is the person or machine generat-

ing the message, which may be simply a sequence of characters, as

in a telegraph or teletype, or may be expressed mathematically as

96



96 Code Economics

INFORMATION

SOURCE TRANSMITTER RECEIVER DESTINATION

SIGNAL RECEIVED

SIGNAL

MESSAGE MESSAGE



NOISE

SOURCE

FIGURE 6.1 Claude Shannon’s Diagram of the Fundamentals of a Communi-cations System. Source: Taken from Claude Elwood Shannon Collected Papers, ed. NJA Sloane and Aaron Wyner. © 1993 IEEE, reproduced in James, Gleick (2011), The Information: A History, a Theory, a Flood, New York, NY: Random House, Inc.; p. 527.

Reprinted with permission of IEEE and Wiley.

functions— f(x, y, t)— of time and other variables. In a complex ex-

ample like color television, the components are three functions in a

three- dimensional continuum, Shannon noted. (2) The transmit-

ter “operates on the message in some way”— that is, encodes the

message— to produce a suitable signal. A telephone converts sound

pressure into analog electric current. A telegraph encodes characters

in dots, dashes, and spaces. More complex messages may be sampled,

compressed, quantized, and interleaved. (3) The channel: “merely

the medium used to transmit the signal.” (4) The receiver inverts the

operation of the transmitter. It decodes the message, or reconstructs

it from the signal. (5) The destination “is the person (or thing)” at

the other end. In the case of ordinary speech, these elements are the

speaker’s brain, the speaker’s vocal cords, the air, the listener’s ear, and

the listener’s brain.18

We see here immediately that the subject matter of information theory disappears if communication is costless and signal transmission is per-fect. No noise, no problem. The nature of the world is just the oppo-site: noise is abundant, communication is costly, and signal transmis-sion is imperfect. The challenge is to build a reliable economy with less reliable people. In this way, the economy is an information processing organism.

97



Information 97

Information theory earned a central place among biologists decades ago, beginning in 1956 with the discovery of the structure of DNA. As Sydney Brenner, the 2002 Nobel Laureate in medicine, said in 1971, “I feel that this new molecular biology has to go in this direction— to explore the high- level logical computers, the programs, the algorithms of development. Where a science like physics works in terms of laws, or a science like molecular biology is stated in terms of mechanisms, maybe now what one has to begin to think of is algorithms. Recipes. Procedures.”19 The result of the transformation Brenner described was a revolution in the life sciences that continues to unfold today, with dra-matic effects, including the advent of gene therapies and biomolecular computing.

When I assert that economics must properly be understood as a branch of information theory, I am referring to the centrality of the communications problem that exists whenever one person attempts to share know- how with another. I am referring, in other words, to the centrality of code.

Over the past two centuries, there has been much more to inquiry about the economics of production than is present in the ideas of the classical and neoclassical schools of economics, as dominant as both have been in their influence on research, instruction, and policy. Indeed, for at least 150 years, some of the most noted and respected contributors to the field of economics have advanced ideas that suggest a very different way of thinking about economic fundamentals than those represented by the standard textbook economics of neoclassical choice theory.

Renowned mathematical economist Alfred Marshall famously stated in his Principles of Economics, published in 1910, that “the Mecca of the economist lies in economic biology rather than in economic dynamics. But biological conceptions are more complex than those of mechanics; a volume on Foundations must therefore give a relatively large place to mechanical analogies; and frequent use is made of the term ‘equi-librium,’ which suggests something of statical analogy.”20 At about the same time, in The Theory of Economic Development, Austrian econo-mist Joseph Schumpeter described the role of entrepreneurs as the eco-nomic agents responsible for “creating new combinations,” where the “new combinations” were essentially recombinations of economically

98



98 Code Economics

relevant code.21 Thereafter, a series of economists, Herbert Simon fore-most among them, put the challenges of gathering, sharing, and pro-cessing economically relevant information at the center of their work.22

Taken together and combined with foundational insights from other fields— notably evolutionary biology and molecular biology— the contributions of these economists constitute a distinct domain of inquiry within economics. These contributions have focused on people as producers and on the algorithms that drive the development of the economy.

This domain of inquiry is Code Economics.



Q 7

Learning

The Dividend of Doing



If a machine is expected to be infallible, it cannot also be intelligent.

— Alan Turing, Lecture to the London Mathematical Society, 1947



The first meal Julia Child served to her husband, Paul, after they were married on September 1, 1946, was a dinner of brains stewed in a red wine sauce. It was inedible. This was not surprising, since Child, newly wed at the age of 34, had never learned to cook. Born to moderately wealthy parents in Pasadena, California, Julia had never stood on a stool to watch her mother prepare the family’s meals. The cooking in the household was left to hired help, the output nourishing but artless. The family ate their meals regularly and dutifully, but the food was not discussed.

The turning point for Julia occurred two years into her marriage, when Paul was posted to the U.S. embassy in Paris. On November 3, 1948, having just arrived in France on the transatlantic ocean liner America, Paul, who had lived in France in the 1920s, introduced Julia to French cuisine at a restaurant in Rouen called La Couronne, which was housed in a medieval quarter- timber house built in 1345. “In Pasadena we used to have boiled mackerel for Friday dinners,” Julia later recalled. “Codfish balls with egg sauce, ‘boiled’ (poached) salmon on the Fourth of July, and the occasional pan- fried trout when camping in the Sierras. But at La Couronne I experienced fish, and a dining experience, of a



99

100



100 Code Economics

higher order than I ever had before. It was the most exciting meal of my life.”1

Over the next four years, Child immersed herself ever more deeply in French cuisine— first as an enthusiastic restaurant patron, then as a home cook, and finally as an aspiring chef.

Despite her lack of experience in the kitchen, she persuaded the di-rector of the renowned Cordon Bleu cooking school to permit her to enroll in a year- long course for professional restaurateurs. The class in-cluded 11 World War II veterans studying in Paris under the GI Bill … and Julia. She distinguished herself from the outset with a methodical and determined approach:

When I wasn’t in school, I was experimenting at home, and became

a bit of a Mad Scientist. I did hours of research on mayonnaise for

instance, and although no one else seemed to care, I thought it was

fascinating. When the weather turned cold, the mayonnaise sud-

denly became a terrible struggle, because the emulsion kept separat-

ing, and it wouldn’t behave when there was a change in the olive oil

or the room temperature. I finally got the upper hand by going back

to the beginning of the process, studying each step scientifically, and

writing it all down. By the end of my research I believe I had writ-

ten more on the subject of mayonnaise than anyone in history …

In this way I had finally discovered a foolproof recipe, which

was a glory!2

Thirteen years and more than 10,000 hours of such experimenta-tion later, Julia Child completed her first cookbook, Mastering the Art of French Cooking. Over the coming decades she inspired millions of people in the United States to undertake their own culinary experimen-tation at home and to learn at least one phrase in French: “Bon appétit!”

“Two roads diverged in a wood,” wrote Robert Frost, “and I— I took the one less traveled by, and that has made all the difference.”3

The history of science is full of such roads that diverge in the wil-derness of inquiry. In the history of economic thought, an example of a road not taken “that has made all the difference” is a paper published in the inaugural volume of the Quarterly Journal of Economics (now the

101



Learning 101

highest ranked economics journal) by Francis Walker, the first presi-dent of the American Economic Association.

Walker was a Civil War veteran who had risen to prominence among economists due to his groundbreaking statistical analysis— one might say he was an early data scientist in the field of economics. As superintendent of the 1870 U.S. Census, Walker oversaw production of the Statistical Atlas of the United States, a pioneering work in data visualization.4

Like his contemporary William Jevons, Walker was known as an inci-sive critic of the classical economists’ wage fund theory (see Text Box 5.1). Where Jevons and Walker diverged was in the alternatives they proposed. Jevons’ road led in the direction of viewing economics as “a science of motives.” His assumption was that a firm’s intention is to maximize prof-its, thus it follows that it will hire workers until it reaches the point where the bang- for- the- buck from employing the next unit of capital is equal to that from employing the next unit of labor. While this formulation makes it possible for firms to employ fundamentally different techniques, any such differences and the inherent complexity of production fade into the background as the problem of choosing the optimal allocation of capital and labor— a choice that economists refer to as allocative efficiency— is pushed to the fore. The possibility that some firms might consistently perform better than others by employing better code is ruled out.

Walker takes an altogether different approach.5 “We have the phe-nomenon in every community and in every trade, in whatever state of the market,” Walker observes, “of some employers realizing no profits at all, while others are making fair profits; others, again, large profits; others, still, colossal profits. Side by side, in the same business, with equal command of capital, with equal opportunities, one man is gradu-ally sinking a fortune, while another is doubling or trebling his accu-mulations.”6 It would be nearly a century before data on firm profits were available on a sufficiently large scale to test Walker’s intuition. When such data did become available, they clearly substantiated his claim. The distribution of profits among firms in the economy is indeed highly skewed in just the manner he suggested, with a large number of small firms earning little in the way of profits while a few very large firms earn enormous profits that persist over time— the exceptional profitability of Apple and Alphabet (the parent company of Google) providing obvious current examples.

102



102 Code Economics

So how do these profitable firms succeed? They do so by arriving at a combination of managerial actions that solves a difficult problem in a relatively effective manner:

The excess of produce which we are contemplating comes from di-

recting force to its proper object by the simplest and shortest ways;

from saving all unnecessary waste of materials and machinery; from

boldly incurring the expense— the often large expense of improved

processes and appliances, while closely scrutinizing outgo and prac-

ticing a thousand petty economies in unessential matters; from

meeting the demands of the market most aptly and instantly; and,

lastly, from exercising a sound judgment as to the time of sale and

the terms of payment.7

Walker argued that more profitable entrepreneurs are that way be-cause they are able to solve a difficult problem more effectively than other entrepreneurs— and not simply because they are manipulators or cheats. In the intervening century, a growing body of work supporting this conjecture of Walker’s has emerged. That work describes the three core mechanisms for the advance of code: learning, evolution, and the layering of complexity through the development of platforms. It spans economics, management science, aeronautical engineering, evolution-ary biology, and, of course, the art of French cooking.

Practice, it turns out, does not make perfect. Practice brings im-provement. On an individual level, this is not a great discovery, as learning is among the central functions our neural circuitry is designed for. Whatever we humans do most, we end up doing best. The capac-ity for individual learning is in fact fundamental to the success of the human species. However, humans also have evolved a capacity to learn together in our tribes, villages, cities— and our businesses.8

But if the human learning apparatus is formidable, so are the prob-lems humans aim to solve. Julia Child’s story illustrates that even seem-ingly routine productive activities— in her case, making mayonnaise— become hugely challenging tasks when the objective is not mere competence but mastery. This is where Julia’s story connects to the hy-pothesis advanced by Francis Walker. Julia Child was not successful due

103



Learning 103

to advantages conferred on her by birth or youthful experience; she was 34 years old before she even began to learn to cook! The capacity she brought to her work was a tenacious will to experiment, to learn, and (importantly) to document carefully the results of her learning.

Elsewhere in her autobiography, Julia relates her experience devel-oping a workable recipe for baking a baguette in a U.S. home, which I use as the epigraph to this book’s Introduction. Learning, as Child describes it so clearly, is a process of imagining and testing new “ways of combining.” We typically stop learning not when we find the best possible approach— how would we even know what that was?— but when we find an approach that works well and cannot be improved by any minor modification.

However, learning as a group is more than— or at least fundamen-tally different from— the sum of learning as individuals. To link the lived experience of learning conveyed by Julia Child to the hypothesis advanced by Francis Walker regarding better and worse managers, we need to take a further step: we need to understand how a tenacious will to experiment, to learn, and to carefully document the results of learn-ing might also be a successful strategy for a village or a business.

As we explore this question we will find that, in the empirical eco-nomics of production, few discoveries have been more universal or sig-nificant than that of the firm- level learning curve. As economist James Bessen notes, “Developing the knowledge and skills needed to imple-ment new technologies on a large scale is a difficult social problem that takes a long time to resolve … A new technology typically requires more than an invention in order to be designed, built, installed, oper-ated, and maintained. Initially much of this new technical knowledge develops slowly because it is learned through experience, not in the class-room. Throughout our history, workers have acquired their technical knowledge through a combination of formal training and experience, not in the classroom. They gained much of their important technical knowledge on the job, through ‘learning by doing.’ ”9

In economics, as it turns out, the classic example of learning by doing in the process of production is not making mayonnaise but pro-ducing airframes. That story begins with Gene Vidal (father of author Gore Vidal), a larger- than- life figure who helped propel America into the Golden Age of Flight.

104



104 Code Economics

Born in South Dakota in 1895, Gene Vidal moved east to attend West Point, where he served as one of the first U.S. Army Air Corps pilots and became captain of the football team. He represented the U.S. as a decathlete at the 1920 Olympics and subsequently played football for the Washington Senators of the American Professional Football Association, a forerunner of the National Football League. In the early 1920s, working in partnership with Amelia Earhart and others, Vidal contributed to the launch of three companies that over the next half- century developed into leading U.S. airlines: Transworld Airlines (TWA), Eastern Airlines, and Northeast Airlines.

In 1933, Vidal was appointed director of the Bureau of Air Commerce within the U.S. Department of Commerce. In this new role he imme-diately set to work on his top goal: democratizing the world of flight with the production of a “poor man’s airplane,” much as development of the Model T had democratized access to automobiles. He pledged to put a half- million dollars behind the project of producing an all- metal two- seat aircraft that could be sold at a per- unit cost of $700, assuming a production run of at least 10,000 units. He proposed that the project be sponsored by the federal Depression- era Works Progress Administration as a way to put unemployed engineers and machinists to work. Their task would be to create a plane that would make aviation accessible to all.

Announcement of a design competition in November 1933 did not meet with a friendly reception. At the time, aircraft manufacturers were having considerable difficulty producing a fabric- covered two- seat aircraft for less than $1,000; they considered Vidal’s vision of an all- metal plane produced at a unit cost of $700 to be so improbable that they derided it as the “all- mental” plane. Vidal’s new colleagues in government— including the influential Harold Ickes— were not amenable to issuing a contract for the planes via the Works Progress Administration on the simple grounds that private planes were not public works.10

But Vidal was undeterred. The Bureau of Air Commerce did not have an R&D budget, but it did have a budget to procure aircraft for its inspectors. Using that budget as a lever, the bureau announced a competition for a “safety aircraft” that matched the specifications for the poor- man’s airplane.

105



Learning 105

The controversy around Vidal’s plan prompted Theodore P. Wright, an aeronautical engineer born the same year as Vidal, to compile and publish the 15- years of research he had undertaken on the variation of cost with quantity in the aircraft industry. True, the per- unit cost of $700 targeted by Vidal was unrealistic for a low- volume order, but Wright was interested in knowing if Vidal’s cost target might not be so implausible if the assumption of a 10,000- unit production run was taken fully into account. Using data on the variation of cost with quan-tity that he had painstakingly gathered, Wright sought an answer.

The data published in hand- drawn charts on the first page of Wright’s paper, “Factors Affecting the Cost of Airplanes,” showed a striking em-pirical finding: as cumulative output increased, labor costs dropped with dramatic regularity. Indeed, for every doubling of output, the labor cost per unit tended to drop by 20 percent “on the assumption that no major changes [to the design of the output] will be introduced during construction.” Put differently, if the average labor cost to pro-duce the first one hundred planes was $1,000, then the average labor cost to produce the second hundred planes would be 80 percent of that, or $800. The reasons Wright offered for this cost reduction included refinement and standardization of processes, reduced waste, reduced per- unit overhead, and, of course, individual learning by the workers who produced the planes (see figure 7.1).

A plethora of studies documenting the decline of per- unit labor costs as a function of increasing cumulative output followed Wright’s paper. The plot of this relationship entered the general lexicon as the “learning curve”; “a steep learning curve” came to suggest a process of intensive engagement in a new activity with the potential to yield significant gains in productivity. Remarkably, these studies affirmed not only the principle of organizational learning but also the specific quantitative result reported by Wright— that the doubling of output characteristi-cally yields a 20 percent reduction in per- unit labor costs. The ubiquity of firm learning and the regularity of its observed quantitative features made it a centerpiece of corporate planning, particularly in manufac-turing (see Text Box 7.1). Companies could price products based on a reliable estimate of actual costs subsequent to production at scale.

The impact of the learning curve was not limited to the commer-cial world. As Bessen relates in his 2015 book Learning by Doing, firm

106



106 Code Economics





FIGURE 7.1 T. P. Wright’s Estimate of Cost Reduction in the Production of Airframes. Source: Wright, T. P. (1936). “Factors Affecting the Cost of Airplanes.” Journal of the Aeronautical Sciences 2, 122– 128.



learning also played a central role in U.S. military history. The set-ting was the dire situation at the time the United States entered World War II. German U- boats— protected by Germany’s Enigma code, which will be familiar to anyone who has seen the film The Imitation Game— were operating essentially unimpeded in the North Atlantic. As long as the Germans maintained this significant tactical advantage, the only way the United States could supply its allies was, literally, to build ships more rapidly than the U- boats could sink them. Accordingly, within months of the bombing of Pearl Harbor, Franklin Roosevelt issued a presidential directive calling for the construction of 24 million tons of merchant shipping capacity. Much like Vidal’s $700 airplane, this mandate assumed that some sort of miracle would happen to sharply reduce per- unit shipbuilding costs as cumulative output increased. This particular miracle had a name: the learning curve. Fortunately for the war effort, the miracle was delivered. During the course of the war, shipyards increased their output per worker by a factor of four.11

T. P. Wright went on manage aircraft production during World War II. In 1941 he moved to Washington, D.C., where he assumed the role of assistant chief in the Aircraft Section of the Office of Production Management; he was subsequently appointed chair of the Joint Aircraft

107



Learning 107



Text Box 7.1 The Learning Curve as a Strategic Tool

Perhaps no company has employed the learning curve as a strategic

tool over the past half- century more effectively than Intel, the world’s

dominant producer of computer chips. Generation after generation

of Intel chips have been designed, priced, produced, and sold with

careful estimates of future learning as a guide, and with deliberate

factory- floor R&D strategies in place to ensure that learning pro-

gresses at the anticipated rate.

Some years ago, Gordon Moore, who cofounded Intel in 1968

and is universally known as the originator of Moore’s Law, authored

some reflections on his early years at Intel predecessor Fairchild

Semiconductor to illustrate the direct relationship between code and

firm- level learning curves:

Eight of us left [Shockley Semiconductor] and ended up start-ing Fairchild Semiconductor … We advertised for a general manager, and buried among the many salesmen who believed they could manage was an application from Ed Baldwin, the engineering manager for the Hughes Semiconductor opera-tion, then one of the largest semiconductor companies in the world … Baldwin taught us most of the simple things every M.B.A. knows. He taught us that different parts of the organi-zation should be established with different responsibilities … And everything was working fine: the development and the pre- production engineering for our process and first products was complete; we had a thick process- spec book that recorded all the detailed recipes; and we had interested customers.12

The relative quietude did not last long:

One day we came to work and discovered that Baldwin, along with a group of people he had suggested we hire, were leaving to set up a competing semiconductor company (Rheem) just down the road. He and his group took with them the “reci-pes” for manufacturing that we had developed. But they left behind something more valuable. He had graduated a class of

108



108 Code Economics



engineer- managers who now had the ability to figure out how to do it alone. And we did. Our response to their departure was to compete technologically by improving upon (and manufac-turing) the products that Baldwin had guided us to develop. Although a court eventually ruled that they had to return the copy of the spec book to us, it no longer mattered.13

With his reference to Fairchild’s “thick process- spec book that

recorded all the detailed recipes” for production of semiconductors,

Moore offers a tangible example of the concept of the production

recipe, which I have been using interchangeably with production

algorithm. The existence of such a recipe book points to a miss-

ing element in the textbook representation of technological change

as the simple outward movement of a “production possibilities

frontier”— a term that refers to the maximum output attainable

using a fixed amount of capital and labor, given existing technol-

ogy. Moore’s comments suggest that improvements in the recipes

used to combine inputs into a reliable product that meets market-

determined specifications underlie increases in productivity that

show up as the downward slope of a learning curve. Production

recipes can be thought of literally as the sort of “process spec- book”

alluded to by Moore; alternatively, since Moore states that the prin-

ciple that “different parts of the organization should be established

with different responsibilities” is among the “simple things every

M.B.A. knows,” we can also think of production recipes as all of the

decisions made in any time period by those different and distinct

parts of the organization.14

Moore emphasizes the overriding importance to a firm’s survival

of its ability to improve on existing products and processes. He states

that the response of Fairchild “loyalists” to Baldwin’s departure was

to “compete technologically by improving upon (and manufactur-

ing) the products that Baldwin had guided us to develop.” From the

standpoint of growth and competitiveness in a dynamic environ-

ment, the mix of inputs that enter the production plan is less signifi-

cant than the development of firm- specific technology— that is, the

firm’s complete production recipe.15

109



Learning 109

Committee. In that role, Wright was instrumental in measuring and increasing aircraft production during the war using the same learning curve- based methods that were successful in shipbuilding.

Over time, the firm learning curve influenced the work of economists and became for the production side of economics what downward- sloping demand curves were to the consumer side: a widely observed empirical regularity with potential to provide a reliable anchor for theory. In 1962, future Nobel Laureate Kenneth Arrow wrote a broadly influential paper titled “The Economic Implications of Learning By Doing,” in which he specifically referred to T. P. Wright’s airframe re-sults. He incorporated into his model the same equation Wright em-ployed in his 1936 paper. Just over three decades later, another future Nobel Laureate, Robert Lucas, wrote a comparably influential paper titled “Making a Miracle,” which focused on understanding the rapid economic advance of countries in East Asia and used the Liberty Ships story to frame his description of the drivers of long- term growth. Many others contributed to the literature, documenting learning curves and examining the impact the phenomenon of learning by doing had on the evolution of the economy over time.16

Meanwhile, Vidal’s competition to yield the Model T of the airplane world was successful up to a point: it did yield a winner. Moreover, access to commercial aircraft services was ultimately democratized, as Vidal had hoped it would be. However, despite the subsequent popu-larity of the Cessna and other low- cost, all- metal two- seater airplanes, the path to democratizing aviation services was not through do- it- yourself flying but through the development of the enormous array of products, services, and associated skills that would ultimately give the commercial aviation industry— including TWA, Eastern Airlines, and Northeast Airlines— a truly global reach.

In 2010, a group of economists led by Nicholas Bloom of Stanford University made an offer to a randomly selected group of large textile firms in India: “Over the coming month, we will assess your current management practices, and make suggestions for improvement.” To a randomly selected subset of these firms, the researchers made a further offer: “We will provide you with four months of intensive, onsite con-sulting on the implementation of the recommendations.”

110



110 Code Economics

The results of the experiment, ultimately published in the Quarterly Journal of Economics, were dramatic. As the authors reported, the firms that received the additional four months of intensive onsite consulting showed significant improvement (and also fundamentally improved their management practices) over the “control group” through three mechanisms: “First, [they] raised average productivity by 11% through improved quality and efficiency and reduced inventory. Second, [they] increased decentralization of decision making, as better information flow enabled owners to delegate more decisions to middle manag-ers. Third, [they] increased the use of computers, necessitated by the data collection and analysis involved in modern management.” 17 Furthermore, the firms that received the additional support were able to increase their profits to an extent that would have made it worth-while for them to pay for the consulting, had it not been provided free of charge. The results of the experiment thus raised a question: why had the firms not sought assistance in improving their management practices earlier?

Based on more than a decade of prior work studying management practices around the world, Bloom and coauthors offer a simple expla-nation that confirms that Francis Walker was right: managing a firm is not easy (see figure 7.2). A good manager must be able to solve challeng-ing problems. This is a practice that can be learned, but only with con-siderable effort and (in many cases) expert guidance. As Alfred Marshall wrote in his 1910 masterwork, Principles of Economics, “Capital consists in a great part of knowledge and organization: and of this some part is private property and [an]other part is not. Knowledge is our most powerful engine of production.”18

Whereas dominant variants of the neoclassical production model emphasize categories such as public knowledge and organization, which can be copied and implemented at zero cost, code economics suggests that such categories are unlikely to be significantly relevant in the prac-tical work of creating the business entities that drive the progress of human society. This is because code at the level of a single company— what I term a “production algorithm”— includes firm- specific compo-nents. Producers far from dominant production clusters must learn to produce through a costly process of trial and error. Market- driven advances in production recipes, from which ventures with proprietary

111



1.2 France 1.2 U.K.

1 1

.8 .8

y y

.6 .6

Densit Densit

.4 .4

.2 .2

0 0

1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5

Management score Management score

1.2 Germany 1.2 U.S.

1 1

.8 .8

y y

.6 .6

Densit Densit

.4 .4

.2 .2

0 0

1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5

Management score Management score

FIGURE 7.2 Distribution of Management Scores by Country Evidencing Dispersion of Practices. From Bloom and Van Reenen

(2007): “These are the distributions of the raw management scores (simple averages across all 18 practices for each firm). 1 indicates

worst practice, 5 indicates best practice. There are 135 French observations, 156 German observations, 151 UK observations, and 290

U.S. observations.”

Source: (2007). Nicholas Bloom and John Van Reenen (2007), “Measuring and Explaining Management Practices Across Firms and

Countries.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 122 (4): pp. 1351– 1408.

Reprinted with permission of Oxford University Press.



112



112 Code Economics

value can be created, require a tenacious will to experiment, to learn, and to document carefully the results of that learning. Heterogeneity among managers— as postulated by Francis Walker and quantified by Nicholas Bloom, John Van Reenen, and colleagues— is thus central to understanding observed differences between regions and nations.19

While significant differences remain among firms in terms of the effectiveness of their respective productive algorithms, the profession-alization of management that has occurred since World War II has had an equalizing effect. Developing complex supply chains required man-agement approaches far more complex than the strategies employed by Gaspard de Prony. (Think, for example, of the development of total quality management.) In the first sentence of his widely influential 1974 work, Management: Tools, Responsibilities, Practices, business thinker Peter Drucker went so far as to state: “The emergence of management in this century may have been a pivotal event in history.”20 Even in light of the transformative impact of penicillin, the transistor, and the Internet, Drucker makes a valid point. Management and the develop-ment of technical standards combined to enable not just machines but organizations to be interoperable and collaborative. Companies thus could become far bigger and supply chains far more complex than ever before.

By this route, we come at last to a resolution of the (admittedly minor) mystery of the overcrowded conference session on machine learning re-ferred to in chapter six. The actual tools of machine learning have been in active use for three decades, thus the graduates who packed into that conference room to hear Susan Athey and others were not seek-ing an understanding of those tools. Their desire to be in that room reflects the fact that the advantage in using machine- learning tools in a competitive environment lies in the dimensions of interpretation, asking questions, and intuition that cannot be directly embedded into a machine- learning algorithm. Downloading a program is not enough to gain access to those dimensions of Big Data analytics; to access the insights of the people skilled in these dimensions of data science, one has to be in the room with them— in this case, literally.

In this sense, data science is like cooking. What brought Julia Child fame wasn’t publication of Mastering the Art of French Cooking, which

113



Learning 113

represented a decade- long attempt to codify every aspect of her culinary practice, but the success of her pioneering cooking program, which gave her non- expert audience at home the opportunity to be in the kitchen with her as she cooked. This format has proven enormously popular for the simple reason that there is much about cooking that can be conveyed in writing only with great difficulty. Showing is better. Doing is better still.

Julia Child’s struggles to master the art of producing mayonnaise, Nicholas Bloom and John Van Reenen’s compelling evidence on the persistent differences between firms’ management practices, and T. P. Wright’s documentation of the firm learning curve all serve to validate what might be referred to as the Cool Hand Luke Theorem of eco-nomic information: “What we have here is a failure to communicate.”

Here is what I mean: If communicating economically relevant know- how were a perfect and costless activity as assumed in default textbook models of production, we would not see a skilled cook taking weeks to test and document the recipe for a simple condiment. We would not observe wide disparity in management capabilities among firms either within particular industries and geographies or across different indus-tries and geographical contexts. And we would not see firms lowering their costs over time when producing a given good.

All of these examples underscore the following point, core to code economics: The imperfection of communication is not a theory. It is a ubiquitous and inescapable physical reality.

In the next two chapters we’ll switch the focus from learning at the firm level— specifically, the systematic search for improved production recipes— to learning- driven evolution at the level of a city, a region, or an entire economy. Consider, in this broader context, the particular problem that must be solved by natural selection, as articulated in a 1977 Science essay titled “Evolution and Tinkering,” by French biologist Francois Jacob (the recipient, with Jacques Monod and André Lwoff, of the 1965 Nobel Prize in Medicine):

Natural selection is the result of two constraints imposed by every

living organism: (i) the requirement for reproduction, which is ful-

filled thorough genetic mechanisms carefully adjusted by special de-

vices such as mutation, recombination, and sex to produce organisms

114



114 Code Economics

similar, but not equal to, their parents, and (ii) the requirement of a

permanent interaction with the environment because living beings

are what thermodynamicists call open systems and persist only by a

constant flux of matter, energy, and information.21

Where genetic processes must favor convergence and conservation, the processes of learning and adaptation necessitated by constant interac-tion with the environment favor divergence and exploration. The ex-pression of the genetic code as a fertilized egg that develops into a fully realized organism (what biologists refer to as epigenesis) depends upon predictable, error- free repetition. However, the survival of the realized organism requires learning and adaptation, which depend on explora-tion and change.22

A similar idea is expressed by noted ecologist Gregory Bateson in his 1978 book, Mind and Nature: A Necessary Unity; “We face, then, two systems [involving randomness and discovery] that are partly iso-lated from each other. One system is within the individual and is called learning; the other is immanent in heredity and in populations and is called evolution. One is a matter of a single lifetime; the other is a matter of multiple generations of many individuals.”23

Literally and figuratively, the second of the processes— evolution— all starts with DNA.



Q 8

Evolution

The Code of Life



If we wish to be guided by a natural science metaphor, I suggest one drawn from biology rather than physics. Obvious lessons are to be learned from evolutionary biology, and rather less obvious ones from molecular biology. From molecular biology, in particular, we can glimpse a picture of how a few basic mechanisms— the DNA of the Double Helix, for example, or the energy transfer mechanisms elucidated so elegantly by Professor Mitchell— can account for a wide range of complex phenomena. We can see the role in science of laws of qualitative structure, and the power of qualitative, as well as quantitative explanation.

— Herbert Simon, Nobel Lecture, 1978



Legend has it that Ruth Wakefield, proprietress of the Toll House Inn in Whitman, Massachusetts, ran out of nuts while mixing a batch of cookies sometime in 1937. In their place she is said to have used broken pieces of Nestlé’s semi- sweet chocolate, expecting the chocolate to melt and absorb into the dough to create chocolate cookies. Instead, when she removed the pan from the oven, the bits of chocolate remained em-bedded in the cookie and thus the chocolate chip cookie was born— or so the story goes.

The reality is that Wakefield was an experienced baker who published her first cookbook six years before the invention of the chocolate chip cookie. (That cookbook was a bestseller that grew into an 888- recipe volume and was reprinted 28 times.) Those who worked with Wakefield



115

116



116 Code Economics

say that she understood full well that the semi- sweet chocolate would not melt into the dough. Wakefield’s only account of the invention came in an interview she gave decades later: “We had been serving a thin butterscotch- nut cookie with ice cream. Everybody seemed to love it, but I was trying to give them something different. So I came up with the Toll House cookie.” Another reporter’s account from the same era stated that Wakefield “worked out the recipe on the way back from a trip to Egypt.”1

Whatever the details of her moment of inspiration, it is clear that Wakefield and her husband Kenneth knew how to run a restaurant. They started the Toll House Inn in 1930, just months after the Black Tuesday stock market crash of October 29, 1929. By their third day of operation, their original $50 in operating capital was down to $10. In spite of their inadequate startup capital and inauspicious timing, their business grew throughout the Great Depression. Located on the road from Boston to Cape Cod, the Toll House Inn benefited from two significant trends: the ascent of automotive transport and the democra-tization of the concept of vacation. By the time Wakefield experienced her famed moment of inspiration, the restaurant employed over one hundred people, served one thousand customers a day, had earned the Wakefields more than a half- million dollars, and was known through-out the region. In the 1940s and 1950s, patrons included composer Cole Porter, actresses Ethel Merman and Bette Davis, baseball player Joe DiMaggio, and first lady Eleanor Roosevelt.

Service was, of course, as much a part of the recipe for success at the Toll House Inn as the food. A post- World War II pamphlet captures both the owners’ aspirations and the spirit of a country fresh from mili-tary victory and consumed by industrial growth: “No military machine or factory production line was ever geared toward more smooth- running cohesion,” the pamphlet stated. “Long- range planning and constantly studied personnel are reflected in an operating framework flawless in its unruffled perfection.” The martial and industrial similitudes are given credence by the fact that every Toll House employee had to master a seven- page manual of standard service procedures at the restaurant.

The recipe that made the greatest difference in the success of the Toll House Inn arguably was not the one for chocolate chip cookies— which is still printed on every bag of Nestlé’s semi- sweet chocolate chips and

117



Evolution 117

is the one I refer to in the Introduction to this book— but the adminis-trative “recipe” the Wakefields employed in operating their restaurant. Their recipes for preparing meals can be thought of as “sub- recipes” of this encompassing organizational code— the practices that governed the dining experience at the Toll House Inn.

Production recipes— code executed on an organizational scale— are much like culinary recipes on an entirely different scale of activ-ity. Production recipes are comprised of discrete tasks that, when per-formed in combination, yield clearly specified outputs. Each task can be refined and be the subject of experimentation; different arrange-ments of tasks (which is to say, different recipes) will result in different outputs. As pioneering evolutionary economist Sidney Winter wrote in 1968, “ ‘Knowing how to bake a cake’ is clearly not the same thing as ‘knowing how to bring together all of the ingredients for a cake.’ Knowing how to bake a cake is knowing how to execute the sequence of operations that are specified, more or less closely, in a cake recipe.”2 In code economics, this distinction takes on first- order importance.

Sidney Winter’s comments echo the nearly contemporaneous com-ments of Sydney Brenner, whom I quoted earlier: “Where a science like physics works in terms of laws, or a science like molecular biology, to now, is stated in terms of mechanisms, maybe now what one has to begin to think of is algorithms. Recipes. Procedures.”3 Knowing how to create life is not the same as knowing how to bring together the in-gredients for life.

Much as DNA encodes the recipe of life, production recipes are the DNA of the economy.

At the same time T. P. Wright was engaged in research on learn-ing curves, which I described in the last chapter, his brother Sewall Wright published a paper titled “The Roles of Mutation, Inbreeding, Crossbreeding and Selection in Evolution.” The article would ulti-mately have at least as great an impact in the field of evolutionary bi-ology as T. P.’s “Factors Affecting the Cost of Airplanes” did among management scientists and economists.4

Sewall Wright was a major contributor to the modern synthesis in evolutionary biology— that is, the systematic integration of the micro-genetics of combination and recombination (first described by Gregor

118



118 Code Economics

Mendel) with the macro theory of evolution (first and most famously expounded by Charles Darwin, with significant contributions from Herbert Spencer) that described the changing character of populations over time. Sewall Wright’s work constituted a significant advance over Darwinian theory and offered a bridge from evolutionary biology to other domains of inquiry.

He began “The Roles of Mutation” by distinguishing between two mechanisms by which genetic novelty might be introduced into particular populations. The first was single- point mutation, empha-sized by Darwin, which would constitute incremental change for an offspring relative to a parent. The second was sexual or biparental reproduction, emphasized by Mendel, which would constitute large- scale, combinatorial change for an offspring relative to the parents. Wright noted the fundamentally unsatisfactory nature of mutation as the sole factor in the evolutionary process: “The observed properties of gene mutation— fortuitous in origin, infrequent in occurrence and deleterious when not negligible in effect— seem about as unfavorable as possible for an evolutionary process. [With] united bi- parental re-production, however, a limited number of mutations which are not too injurious to be carried by the species may furnish an almost in-definite field of possible variations through which the species may work its way under natural selection.” Wright supported his claim by describing the literally astronomical number of combinations of genes that are possible in higher organisms.5 Due to the enormous combinatorial possibilities afforded by sexual reproduction, popula-tions of higher organisms (including humans) demonstrate tremen-dous genetic diversity.6

To organize inquiry into how populations evolve over time, Wright introduced the idea of a “landscape” that assigns each genetic combina-tion to a particular environmentally determined “fitness” level. “The problem of evolution,” he states, “is that of a mechanism by which the species may continually find its way from lower to higher peaks in such a field. In order that this may occur, there must be some trial and error mechanism on a grand scale by which the species may explore the region surrounding a small portion of the field which it occupies. To evolve, the species must not be under the strict control of [mutation- driven] natural selection.”7

119



Evolution 119

Sexual reproduction provides such a mechanism, with which a pop-ulation scans its fitness landscape for potentially improved variants. In a closed population, inbreeding combines with natural selection to shift the distribution of genetic combinations “uphill” in the landscape toward a fixed number of “peaks,” a peak being defined as the local maximum for favorable adaptation to the environment. After sufficient time has elapsed to allow the population to converge on such peaks, a certain stasis sets in. While mutation may continue to introduce some variation after the population has reached the high points on the fitness landscape, “the species will occupy a certain field of variation about a peak … The field occupied [on the landscape] remains constant al-though no two individuals are ever identical.” Under such conditions, “further evolution can only occur by the appearance of wholly new (in-stead of recurrent) mutations, and ones which happen to be favorable from the first [instance it appears].”8 Absent fortuitous encounters with entire new populations of the same species, the single most effective way out of this trap is for the species to subdivide into local subspecies that occasionally crossbreed. This allows the regular introduction of truly new combinations that fundamentally expand the field of varia-tion occupied by the species.

Wright’s primary conclusion is that evolution requires a balance among the various mechanisms for generating novelty on which it de-pends: mutation, selection, inbreeding, and crossbreeding. In the short run, narrow specialization leads to economies of scale and increased productivity; however, in the long run, narrow specialization leads to the exhaustion of possibilities for search and thus to evolutionary dead ends. Success for a species, as well as for a company and a region, de-pends on balancing these factors. The early history of one well- known global franchise corporation serves to illustrate.

In 1956, a milkshake- mixer salesman by the name of Ray Kroc was run-ning into difficulties. A company by the name of Hamilton Beach had come out with a new line of low- cost mixers that was threatening his business. Always on the lookout for a new opportunity, Kroc took note of an anomaly in his sales records: a single restaurant in San Bernardino, California, had ordered eight of his Multimixers, each with the capac-ity to produce five milkshakes. What restaurant needed to produce

120



120 Code Economics

40 milkshakes at a time? Intrigued, Kroc traveled to San Bernardino to visit a small hamburger and hot dog restaurant run by two brothers, Dick and Mac McDonald.

The restaurant was unlike any Kroc had every seen. In contrast to the drive- in restaurants popular at the time, the McDonald brothers’ restaurant had no waitresses or seating, and it offered only cheeseburg-ers, hamburgers, french fries, sodas, and milkshakes. All meals were prepared in an assembly- line manner and delivered to customers within a minute of ordering.9

Like Ruth Wakefield, the McDonald brothers had gotten their start in the food service business during the Great Depression. With a $5,000 loan, they opened the Airdrome hot dog stand in 1937 in Arcadia, California. In 1940 they moved their operation to San Bernardino and changed the name to McDonald’s Barbeque.10 Eight years later, as the postwar economy took off, the brothers undertook a radical experi-ment: they shut down their restaurant entirely and reopened a month later with a new business model that was optimized to deliver meals with assembly- line efficiency. They called their design the “Speedee Service System.”

Kroc, whose gift was knowing a good idea when he saw one, was hooked. He brokered a deal with the brothers to license the McDonald’s name and method. Kroc opened his first McDonald’s restaurant in 1955 in Des Plaines, California. Within five years he had opened two hundred new franchises across the country. He pushed his operators obsessively to adhere to a system that reinforced the company motto: “Quality, service, cleanliness, and value.” In 1961 he bought the company from the founders and a franchising empire was born.

In his 1987 autobiography, Kroc described the essence of the franchise- based system behind the growth of McDonald’s:

It’s all interrelated— our development of the restaurant, the training,

the marketing advice, the product development, the research that has

gone into each element of the equipment package. Together with our

national advertising and continuing supervisory assistance, it forms

an invaluable support system. Individual operators pay 11.5 percent

of their gross to the corporation for all of this, and I think it’s a hell

of a bargain.11

121



Evolution 121

The process of operating a McDonald’s franchise was engineered to be as cognitively undemanding as possible. As Kroc stated, “a person doesn’t need to be super smart or have more than a high school educa-tion, but he or she must be willing to work hard and concentrate exclu-sively on the challenge of operating that store.”12

Kroc created a program that could be broken into subroutines. A single operator could run a subroutine by following the instruction manual provided to him or her as a franchisee. Acting like the DNA of the organization, the manual allowed the Speedee Service System to function in a variety of environments without losing essential structure or function.

Meanwhile, far from Arcadia, California, a pair of young scientists were seeking the structure of a code of a different type. Their discovery would change science and shape the way we humans see our place in the world.

On the evening of Sunday, March 1, 1953, James Watson and Francis Crick went out to a pub, The Eagle in Cambridge, England. That morn-ing, Watson had experienced a moment of insight that promised to be a breakthrough in the duo’s attempt to solve the puzzle of the structure of DNA. Working with cardboard cutouts of the base pairs that fea-tured centrally in their still- incomplete model, Watson noticed an un-expected symmetry that suggested a solution, but on the cusp of great discovery he was suddenly and frustratingly stuck. Why? The cardboard cutouts did not provide sufficient precision for Watson and Crick to be confident of their structure. They had ordered metal models of the base pairs from a local machine shop, but delivery had been delayed. “That night … we could not firmly establish the double helix,” Watson later recalled. “Until the metal bases were on hand, any model building would be too sloppy to be convincing.” Without a physical scale model against which to test possible configurations and confirm the conjec-tured symmetry, Watson and Crick could not persuade themselves— much less anyone else— that they had hit upon the correct structure.

There really was no time to waste. Fully cognizant that a Nobel Prize was at stake, Watson and Crick— 24 and 36 years old at the time, re-spectively, and relatively unknown in the scientific world— were en-gaged in a David and Goliath- like contest with Linus Pauling, the

122



122 Code Economics

greatest chemist of the era. The goal toward which they were racing was a precious one: to be the first to discover, literally, the code of life.

Watson, a student of biochemistry, and Crick, a physicist turned biologist, had both been motivated to study the structure of the ge-netic code after reading a slim collection of lectures written by famed quantum physicist Erwin Schrödinger, titled What Is Life? Pauling, many years earlier, had been Schrödinger’s student in Zurich. In What Is Life? Schrödinger articulated the fundamental challenge in-herent in understanding life. In a world governed by the Second Law of Thermodynamics, which dictates that any closed system must tend from order toward disorder over time, how is it that we can observe self- perpetuating islands of order that not only persist but also grow in complexity— which is to say, life itself? Put differently (and borrowing imagery from Norbert Wiener), if the entropy of the universe is ever in-creasing, how does life manage its trick of swimming upstream against the cosmic tide of chaos and disorder?13

As Schrödinger saw it, roughly summarizing what was known of molecular biology at the time, the instructions for life must take the form of an “aperiodic solid.” Unlike a periodic solid, such as a crystal, in which the same pattern is repeated again and again like “ordinary wall-paper,” this aperiodic solid would be like “a masterpiece of embroidery, say a Raphael tapestry, which shows no dull repetition, but an elaborate, coherent, meaningful design traced by the great master.” 14 Referring to this aperiodic solid as the “hereditary substance,” Schrödinger ex-plained the way out of the entropic conundrum he had posed: “To rec-oncile the high durability of the hereditary substance with its minute size, [nature] had to evade the tendency to disorder by ‘inventing the molecule,’ in fact, an unusually large molecule which has to be a mas-terpiece of highly differentiated order.”15 In this way, the code of life does not contravene “the natural tendency of things to go over into disorder” and instead reveals how nature allows the existing order to be maintained and replicated (see Text Box 8.1).

What Is Life? constituted an open challenge to the scientific com-munity to search for the structure of the genetic code. Watson, Crick, and Pauling were among those who responded to that challenge. Both teams— Watson and Crick’s and Pauling’s— were working from roughly the same evidence: (1) X- ray diffraction photographs that offered

123



Evolution 123



Text Box 8.1 The Difference between Artificial and Natural Objects

“The difference between artificial and natural objects seems imme-

diately and unambiguously apparent to all of us.” So begins Jacques

Monod’s 1972 book, Chance and Necessity. “We know the knife was

man- made for a use its maker visualized beforehand. The object ren-

ders in material form the preexistent intention that gave birth to

it, and its form is accounted for by the performance expected of it

even before it takes shape” (p. 3). In contrast, we perceive natural

objects to have been “molded by the free play of physical forces to

which we cannot attribute any design, any ‘project’ or purpose.” Our

presumption that a hard and fast distinction exists between artificial

and natural objects begins to weaken once we seek an objective and

repeatable method for distinguishing between the two. Imagine that

the Mars rover was equipped with an apparatus of this type. What

could be more fascinating than to inspect extraterrestrial objects to

see if they show indications of having been the products of non-

human intelligent life? In order to detect evidence of the past pres-

ence of intelligent beings, Monod states, “we would have to search

and be able to recognize its products, however radically unlike the

fruit of human industry they might be” (p. 4).

We might note upon brief reflection that, outside of the micro-

scopic realm, natural objects rarely incorporate simple geometries—

shapes with right angles or regular triangles, for example— while

artificial objects frequently do. The internal structure of leaves, the

branching pattern that characterize a river delta or venous network,

and the swirling patterns made by smoke all exhibit design complex-

ity that far exceeds that of artificial objects. We might, therefore, start

with a test that would look for macroscopic regularity and repetition

as a feature of artificial construction. Trying out our program on ter-

ritorial objects, however, we would soon run into trouble. Crystals,

for example, incorporate basic geometries that repeat themselves.

Likewise a honeycomb, which is constructed from repeated hexago-

nal cylinders.

At this point, Monod notes, we will determine that an approach

to distinguishing between natural and artificial objects on the basis

124



124 Code Economics



of observed structural characteristics is unlikely to be successful. At

that point we might return to our original insight and seek to build

a new machine, distinguishing between natural and artificial objects

in terms of their exhibited purpose. “Programming the machine so

that henceforth it studies not only the structure but the eventual

performance of the examined objects, we end up with still more dis-

appointing results.” It would be both “arbitrary and pointless … to

deny that the natural organ, the eye, represents the materialization

of a ‘purpose’— that of picking up images— while this is indisputably

also the origin of the camera. It would only be more absurd to deny

it since, in the last analysis, the purpose which ‘explains’ the camera

can only be the same as the one to which the eye owes its structure”

(p. 8).

All of this leads Monod to his core point, which has nothing to

do with the Mars rover: “Every artifact is a product made by a liv-

ing being which through it expresses, in a particularly conspicuous

manner, one of the fundamental characteristics common to all living

being without exception: that of being objects endowed with a pur-

pose or project, which at the same time they exhibit in their structure

and carry out through their performances (such as, for instance, the

making of artifacts)” (p. 9).

Having been the corecipient of the Nobel Prize in Physiology

or Medicine for “discoveries concerning genetic control of enzyme

and virus synthesis,” Monod knew something about the relation-

ship between code and life. As discussed in chapter six, DNA codes

for life through exactly the mechanism that was the subject of the

discoveries by Monod and his colleagues: the synthesis of enzymes

(proteins and RNA) and viruses.

DNA builds products with a purpose. So do people. This is

Monod’s insight.



low- resolution images of the shadows of DNA, and (2) the basic laws of chemistry that dictated which structures could have the “high dura-bility” that Schrödinger had noted would be required of “the hereditary substance.” Watson and Crick had a significant advantage over Pauling

125



Evolution 125





FIGURE 8.1 James Watson (left) and Francis Crick (right) with their Original Model of the Double Helix. © Photo Researchers, used with permission.



in that their colleague Rosalind Franklin had recently generated newly revealing X- ray diffraction photographs that provided additional evi-dence to guide them in their model building. With that discovery, the pace of the race intensified.

Watson recounts that, on the day of their March 1 outing to The Eagle, he “wandered down to see if the [metal- working] shop could be speeded to produce the purines and pyrimidines later that afternoon. Only a little encouragement was needed to get the final soldering ac-complished in the next couple of hours.”

With the required model pieces in hand, Watson went straight to work: “The brightly shining metal plates were then immediately used to make a model in which for the first time all the DNA components were present. In about an hour I had arranged the atoms in positions which satisfied both the X- ray data and the laws of stereochemistry.”16

126



126 Code Economics

Following two years of progressive search and discovery, that morn-ing’s work settled the puzzle of the structure of DNA (see figure 8.1). Within months the pair had published a paper in Nature that an-nounced their discovery. On the role of DNA as the carrier of the code of life, they noted simply, “It has not escaped our notice that the spe-cific pairing we have postulated immediately suggests a possible copy-ing mechanism for the genetic material.”17

Seven years later, James Watson and Francis Crick were in Stockholm to accept the Nobel Prize in Physiology or Medicine, awarded for the discovery of the structure of DNA.18

A century after Herbert Spencer introduced the term “survival of the fittest,” a half- century after Sewall Wright introduced the idea of adap-tive fitness landscapes to evolutionary biology, and a quarter- century after Watson and Crick discovered the structure of DNA, two young scientists named Stuart Kauffman and Simon Levin further advanced evolution theory. Their model of evolutionary fitness landscapes incor-porated two characteristics shared by both genes and the evolutionary process itself: complexity and interdependence. By abstracting the es-sential features of the evolutionary process in a general modeling frame-work, Kauffman and Levin’s theoretical framework provided a bridge to the study of technology that ultimately would link the work of two Wright brothers: Sewall Wright’s work on adaptive landscapes and T. P. Wright’s work on the dynamics of learning that he documented in “Factors Affecting the Cost of Airplanes.”

Kauffman and Levin began their 1987 paper, “Towards a General Theory of Adaptive Walks on Rugged Landscapes,” with the following statement: “Adaptive evolution, to a large extent, is a complex combi-natorial process.” Complexity in this context means that the relation-ship between changes in genetic code and resultant fitness is compli-cated by the fact that genes express themselves in combinations, so that a mutation of one gene is likely to affect the function of many genes. This interdependence in evolutionary biology is known as epistatic in-teractions among genes. Epistatic interactions make the problem solved by evolution a sort of “Rubik’s Cube from Hell,” whereby a change that improves fitness locally may result in reduced fitness globally. Kauffman and Levin went on to note the similarity between the structure of the

127



Evolution 127

problem solved by evolution and that of complex combinatorial prob-lems in computer science and physics.19

Kauffman and Levin introduced their model by making reference to the essay by Francois Jacob that I cited at the end of the last chapter, which advanced the idea that evolution as a process was much more like tinkering than optimization: “Natural selection does not work as an engineer works … It works like a tinkerer— a tinkerer who does not know exactly what he is going to produce but uses … everything at his disposal to produce some kind of workable object.”20 This process is progressive, moving from simpler to more complex forms: “Evolution does not produce novelties from scratch. It works on what already exists, either transforming a system to give it new functions or com-bining several systems to produce a more elaborate one [as] during the passage from unicellular to multicellular forms.”21 The very fact of pro-gressive evolution means that the living systems that are the result of evolutionary processes face an increasing number of constraints as their complexity increases: “The constraints to which systems are subjected vary with the level of complexity. There are always some constraints imposed by stability and thermodynamics. But as complexity increases, additional constraints appear— such as reproduction for living systems, or economic requirements for social systems.”22 To be viable in the world, a new molecule originating in the primordial swamp need only conform with fundamental physical laws. To be similarly viable, a new genetic combination, however, must not only conform to physical laws but also increase the “fitness” of its carrier within its given environ-ment. A new technological combination must improve upon existing technologies and provide sufficient value to people that it is recorded, shared, and copied.

The Kauffman and Levin model was as simple as it was powerful. Imagine a genetic code of length N, where each gene might occupy one of two possible “states”— for example, “0” and “1” in a binary com-puter.23 The difficulty of the evolutionary problem was tunable with the parameter K, which represented the average number of interactions among genes. The NK model, as it came to be called, was able to re-produce a number of measurable features of evolution in biological systems. Evolution could be represented as a genetic walk on a fitness landscape, in which increasing complexity was now a central parameter.

128



128 Code Economics

Might the same model, derived from evolutionary biology, explain the evolution of technology?

Life is nothing else but the capacity for invariant reproduction. An organism, a process, or an organization create the circumstances for their own self- replication, both through time and across space. The story of McDonald’s illustrates. The success of Ray Kroc was essentially that of creating code— in this case, a franchise manual— that could propagate across space and time. The fact that “billions and billions” of McDonald’s hamburgers have been sold defines a certain type of suc-cess in code economics. Yet, as evidenced by the challenges McDonald’s has faced in recent years as consumer tastes have changed, an organism’s success in self- replication does not obviate the need for learning and ad-aptation. Indeed, in order for more complex forms of life to be viable, they must possess a capacity for learning and adaptation— mostly of an involuntary, unconscious variety.

By this route we arrive not only back to the cases of Dick and Mac McDonald and the Speedee Service System, but also to the seven- page manual of standard operating procedures that Ruth Wakefield gener-ated for her employees at the Toll House Restaurant and the recipes tested and documented with great effort by Julia Child in Mastering the Art of French Cooking— not to mention the beer recipes recorded in 5,500- year- old Sumerian tablets. In each of these instances, the ob-jective of encoding production recipes was invariant reproduction; in the first case the objective was the reliable reproduction of a franchise business; in the second that of a service experience; in the third that of a authentically prepared dish; and in the fourth, beer.

To the extent that the analogy holds, technology may also be noth-ing else but the capacity for invariant reproduction. However, in order for more complex forms of technology to be viable over time, technol-ogy also must possess a capacity for learning and adaptation.

Evolutionary theory as applied to the advance of code is the focus of the next chapter. Kauffman and Levin’s NK model ends up providing a framework for studying the creation and evolution of code. Learning curves act as the link between biology and economics.



Q 9

Platforms

The Role of Standards in Enabling

Increased Complexity



Everywhere, economic activity is turning outward by embracing shared business and technology standards that let businesses plug into truly global systems of production.

— Sam Palmisano, The Globally Integrated Enterprise, 2006



If the suggestion I have made repeatedly that the economy is “alive” seems fanciful or far- fetched, it is much less so if we consider the alter-native: that it is dead.

What would it mean if the economy were dead? It would mean that it was inert. It would mean that it lacked the capacity to reproduce itself. It would mean that it decays and loses structure over time.

But, as we can readily observe, the economy— which exists beyond the control or direction of any single person and develops order and structure on a timeline that far exceeds a human lifespan— is not, in fact, inert. The economy does have the capacity to reproduce itself. And the economy gains in structure and complexity over time.

Those familiar with the study of such physical phenomena as a roll-ing boil in a pot of water, or a hurricane twisting high in the atmos-phere,1 will counter that the presence of structure in the economy does not necessarily suggest that the economy is alive. All that is required for such persistent “dissipative” structures to exist is that they process large amounts of energy throughput. The only additional explanation



129

130



130 Code Economics

required for the order observed in the economy is its own observa-bly large energy throughput— analogous to the flame under the pot of water that keeps it in a rolling boil.

The scaling laws that relate a city’s “metabolism” to its size, which I described in chapter one, lend some credence to this energy- centric line of argument. Regular, predictable relationships exist between the internal structure of both organisms and economies, and in the fact that both require energy and “nutrients.” However, the existence of such regularities on a macro scale are little more than shadows on the wall when it comes to understanding the micro- scale structural changes that actually are responsible for the evolution of the economy. In this chapter I will explore in more detail what it means for the economy to be alive and why contrary conceptions— including those woven deeply into the fabric of the classical and neoclassical schools of economics— are inconsistent with both logic and experience.

As I stated in the Introduction, the primary reason that I chose “code” as the most appropriate term to describe the mechanism by which technological information is stored and transmitted is not be-cause code is a synonym for computer software but because it is used to describe genetic material— material that both preserves structure and enables organic change. That is the operative analogy. Indeed, as I have insisted throughout, this is more than an analogy: the introduction of production recipes into economics is— by structural parallel if not by magnitude of historic insight— exactly what the introduction of DNA is to molecular biology. It is the essential first step toward a transforma-tion of economics into a branch of information theory.

In the spring of 1993, a professional dream came true for me: I was accepted to attend the Complex Systems Summer School at the Santa Fe Institute (SFI), where a small group of scientists from an array of disciplines— theoretical biologist Stuart Kauffman, economist Brian Arthur, and Nobel Prize- winning physicist Murray Gell- Mann among them— were cloistered in a former monastery where they collaborated on an array of grand projects relating to complexity in physical, biologi-cal, and social systems.

I had come to Santa Fe specifically in the hope of working with two of the leaders of the emerging field of complexity theory: Kauffman

131



Platforms 131

and Arthur. By the time I arrived at the school I had read and re- read everything they had published on the economy as an evolving complex system.

While I dedicated considerable effort that summer to a joint proj-ect on the self- organization of cities,2 my greatest preoccupation— shared with my fellow summer school student José Lobo— was finding a way to integrate the framework of the Kauffman- Levin NK model into neoclassical production theory. Economics had a lot to say about how to optimize the level of inputs to get output, but what about the actual process of turning inputs into outputs? What is the difference between a “high- tech” and a “low- tech” firm anyway? In the Wonderful World of Widgets that is standard economics, ingredients combine to make a final product, but the recipe by which the ingredients actu-ally become the product is nowhere explicitly represented. It seemed that the Kauffman- Levin NK model could be a start toward such a representation.

Economist Michael Porter long ago quipped, “There’s no such thing as a low- tech industry. There are only low- tech companies.”3 This com-ment has the ring of folksy truth to it. But, if accurately applied to the economy of the present, it also reflects a profound shift in the nature of the economy over the past five hundred years. Consider the economy of the Middle Ages. We would have a hard time arguing that most production at that time was “complex.” Returning to the biological analogy, most production was carried out by the equivalent of single- celled organisms. Even as late as the end of the nineteenth century, technological artifacts (which is to say, physical products) and the social arrangements that created them were primitive compared with those of today.

All of that changed in the early twentieth century, with the advent of large- scale production by single firms. The emergence of the great corporations of that era— from Ford, to Thyssen, to the even more ambitious project of state socialism in the USSR— represented a new form of social and economic organization. The complexity of produc-tion itself suddenly became a significant barrier to entry for new firms. General Motors may have been an entrepreneurial startup in the early twentieth century, but by mid- century it was an organizational behe-moth operating on an unprecedented scale.

132



132 Code Economics

What do we mean by complexity in this context? It may be measured most simply in terms of the number of parts in a technological arti-fact.4 The John Deere tractor sold today is clearly more complex than McCormick’s reaper, which in turn was more complex than a plow. The social arrangements required to produce each of these products have also correspondingly increased in complexity over time.5

Understood in this way, complexity emphasizes the difficulty of the problem that is solved by a particular production recipe. A more com-plex problem is simply one for which finding a good solution is more difficult. (Think again of Julia Child’s search for the perfect mayonnaise recipe— more difficult than it might seem at first!) The concept of solv-ing hard problems can be defined quite formally; as applied to produc-tion recipes, it represents a special case of algorithmic complexity that is at the heart of information theory.

The primary causal pathway by which complexity affects the evolu-tion of industries and the economy is via the obstacles to imitation that complexity creates. The greater the complexity of technology, the lower the correlation between the effectiveness of a given produc-tion recipe (e.g., the leader’s method) and that of the same recipe altered slightly (i.e., an imperfect imitation). Using this algorithmic definition, the complexity of a production recipe can be represented in terms of both the number of “operations” or distinct units in-volved in the production process and (critically) the extent of the interdependence between those units. Before imitating a simple tech-nological/ organizational routine, a firm can predict its future perfor-mance characteristics with some reliability. Based on those estimated characteristics, a simple technological/ organizational routine will be adopted— or not.

Complex technologies cannot be imitated in this manner, for two reasons. The first is that different components of a complex technolog-ical problem are typically interdependent, so changing one part of the organizational routine when searching for a solution will affect other parts. Finding a solution to a complex technological problem is thus like solving Rubik’s Cube: you can’t address one part of the problem at a time (analogous to one color on the Cube) the way you can with a simple problem. The second reason is that complex technological problems are more likely to have elements that are not encoded in any

133



Platforms 133

manual, patent, or book of specifications. People “just know” how to perform certain parts of the organizational routine.

For these two reasons, complex technological/ organizational rou-tines cannot be “adopted” in the way economists customarily employ this term. Imitation of such routines is almost always imperfect— sometimes disastrously so— because modifications in the practices of one unit within the firm (alleles, in the DNA analogy) will affect the effectiveness of multiple other units. Because a simple technological/ organizational routine can be easily imitated, it is not likely to yield persistent profits to an early adopter. Enduring technological leadership is based on activities that require the greatest coordination and have the greatest inherent complexity. These activities are the most potentially disruptive to the internal operations of innovating firms, but also the most difficult to imitate when successfully implemented.

If this way of looking at the world is accurate, then the Porter quote above becomes immediately intelligible. We may look at both Walmart and a “mom- and- pop” corner store as existing in the retail sector of the economy, but they are in fact in different lines of business. Walmart is above all a logistics operation; it gets products where they need to be at a low cost. Corner store owners are effectively in the real estate and relationship business; those who succeed generally do so not because they charge exceptionally low prices or offer unusual products but be-cause they save their customers time, and because they give their cus-tomers an experience of human connection— essentially the pleasure of being recognized. Retail is therefore not an inherently low- tech sector of the economy, although it may include low- tech firms— understood through the lens of code economics as “easy to imitate.”

During the summer and fall of 1993, Kauffman, Lobo, and I made some initial progress toward the goal of using an evolutionary model of technology, based on the NK framework, to differentiate high- tech and low- tech firms and describe the evolution of industries. Our joint efforts received a significant boost when noted macroeconomic theorist Karl Shell volunteered to join our team in winter 1994. Shell immedi-ately suggested that we focus our attention on what we all soon agreed was the single most significant unanswered question in the microeco-nomics of production: How do firms learn? In particular, what specific

134



134 Code Economics

search process for better production processes within firms over time could explain the emergence of learning curves, as was observed so con-sistently across industries? While companies like Intel routinely used learning curves as a practical guide to strategy, economists had done little to explain their origins. This was the problem Kauffman, Lobo, Shell, and I set out to solve.

After two years of programming, testing, and iterating models, we ended up with a variant of the NK model that we could use to simulate learning curves. The results: using the simplest default implementation and search of a wide range of potential values for the critical parameters, we identified the subset of parameter values that yielded not only the qualitative characteristics of learning curves but also a number of their quantitative characteristics. We found that observed learning curves cor-responded to production processes that exhibited some interconnection between component parts, but not maximal organizational complexity. Further simulations at the scale of industry suggested that the most ap-pealing industries for entry by new firms were those in which produc-tion was characterized by intermediate levels of complexity. That is, they were neither so mature that the most effective production recipes had all been discovered by incumbent firms, but also not so young that system-atic learning about production was not yet possible, which meant that experience could not yet provide a competitive advantage. This theory lined up with entrepreneurial intuition, as evidenced in Gordon Moore’s story about the early history of Fairchild Semiconductor (see Text Box 7.1): the complexity of production is a factor that limits a new firm’s abil-ity to copy the practices of an incumbent firm.

Kauffman, Lobo, Shell, and I had employed code economics to advance understanding of an important economic phenomenon— as the structural origin of the learning curve surely is— for which clas-sical economics had provided only a very general explanation (for ex-ample, Adam Smith’s division of labor in a pin factory) and neoclassical economics provided no real explanation at all. Others, notably Brian Arthur, had taken the application of code further. Yet the efforts of Santa Fe Institute economists in the early 1990s collectively constituted no more than a rudimentary proof of concept for code economics.

Those who contributed to the intellectual ferment during the early days of the SFI planted seeds of inquiry that took more than a decade

135



Platforms 135

to germinate and grow. From the mid- 1990s until the mid- 2000s, prog-ress in code economics was limited. Complexity theory had failed to yield the empirically robust “killer app” that the work of Paul Douglas had provided for neoclassical production theory (see Text Box 5.2).

But while code economics stagnated, the code economy itself took off. The fundamentally new essence of the code economy that Brian Arthur, Stuart Kauffman, and others all had glimpsed from a distance in the early 1990s had come roaring out of the mist, carried by the Internet. In some cases, algorithmic reality and theory were linked. Abstract work in the early 1990s at SFI and elsewhere on the discrete mathematics of social networks had, via a group of Stanford- based aca-demics, turned into Google’s Page Rank algorithm. Esoteric attempts to use “agent- based” models to simulate the dynamics of city formation had found their way into tens of millions of households via highly pop-ular games such as SimCity and Civilization. Research on the potential for herding and speculative bubbles in financial markets vaulted from the back pages of scholarly journals to the front pages of major newspa-pers when the financial crisis hit in 2008. Stuart Kauffman’s notion of technological search occurring in the space of the “adjacent possible”— a concept derived from the application of the NK model to innovation, and thus close to our joint work on learning curves— was popularized by author Steven Johnson in his book Where Good Ideas Come From. More generally, as discussed at the start of chapter six, Big Data and the Internet of Things had hit the worlds of business and government with force, washing away the foundations of default economic methodolo-gies and challenging the field of economics to respond.

The time had come for a group of us who had been part of those early days at the SFI to try again to define and develop code economics.

In August 2013, nearly 20 years to the month since my first visit to the Santa Fe Institute, I returned there to join a group of econo-mists, anthropologists, corporate technology managers, and others to discuss the very topic I’d worked on at the Complex Systems Summer School: the nature of technology and innovation in economic systems. The occasion was a three- week- long meeting organized by my former coauthor, José Lobo, and his colleague Deborah Strumsky on the rep-resentation of technology “inside the black box”6 of the neoclassical production function.

136



136 Code Economics

Oxford University physicist Doyne Farmer presented work under-taken with collaborators on learning curves and economic food webs. Giovanni Dosi of the Scuola Superiore Sant’Anna in Pisa, Italy, pre-sented research on the knowledge and organizational practices behind input/ output relations. Brian Arthur presented his powerful theory of the recombinant nature of technological change, elaborating on work presented in his 2011 book, The Nature of Technology. I presented a paper representing the early stages of this book.

At the same meeting, Harvard macroeconomist Ricardo Hausmann presented his work with MIT Media Lab- based physicist César Hidalgo on the evolution of complexity at the scale of a country. Developed in a sequence of coauthored publications, beginning with a paper published in Science in 2007,7 that work bears directly on the distinction between low- tech and high- tech goods with which I opened this chapter, and helps develop the concept of technology platforms that is central to this book. Later in this chapter I’ll refer back to the work by Doyne Farmer and his team on learning curves and economic food webs. In com-bination, these papers explain how the economy manages increasing complexity by “hard- wiring” solutions into standards, which in turn define platforms.

Hausmann and Hidalgo’s work on economic complexity begins with data on the actual imports and exports of certain countries across time, which are available for most countries in the world. They use these data to map the progression from simplicity to complexity, across not time but geographical space. Affirming the principle that I stated at the outset, that there is literally no “what” of output without a “how” to produce that output, they observe that products of increasing complex-ity naturally reflect increasingly complex code.

Using the word “capability” to refer to the possession and execu-tion of the code required to produce a given good, Hausmann and Hidalgo describe their method using the analogy of building with Lego blocks: “We can create indirect measures of the capabilities available in a country by thinking of each capability as a building block or Lego piece. In this analogy, a product is equivalent to a Lego model, and a country is equivalent to a bucket of Legos. Countries will be able to make products for which they have all the necessary capabilities, just

137



Platforms 137

as a child is able to produce a Lego model if the child’s bucket contains all of the necessary Lego pieces.”8 This is almost literally the way pro-grams are written: blocks of simpler code are combined to yield more complex code. It is also almost literally the way complex products are assembled: simpler modules are combined to yield more complex final products. The country— in most cases including one key city or a small number of central cities— provides the platform on which individual exporting companies execute code, much as the operating system pro-vides the platform for individual programs that execute code on a dig-ital computer.

To elaborate further on the connection between Hidalgo and Hausmann’s Lego analogy and the language of this book, the Lego pieces constitute snippets of code that have the potential to be com-bined and executed in the economy. If you have the snippet of code to create mayonnaise and you have the snippet of code to cook chicken, then you can combine those two snippets of code— production sub-recipes, if you will— with the code that enables you to cut up a stalk of celery, which yields the code to produce chicken salad. However, if you only have the code to cook chicken but not the code to produce may-onnaise, then you will need to import mayonnaise to produce chicken salad. Furthermore— and crucial to Hausmann and Hidalgo’s results— the fact that your country exports mayonnaise proves that your country has the code to produce mayonnaise.

Note that, in code economics, a given country’s level of “develop-ment” is not sensibly measured by the total monetary value of all goods and services it produces— which is the definition of gross domestic product. It is also not sensibly measured by the total capital or edu-cational level of the workforce. Rather, the development of a coun-try consists of nothing more or less than its capacity to execute more complex code. Relatively more developed countries are those with the code to produce more complex products. Such countries will import raw materials (single Lego pieces) and intermediate products (relatively simpler assemblages of Legos). They will also export complex products in order to pay for the required imports.

Less- developed countries that lack the code to produce complex products will import them, and they will export simpler intermediate products and raw materials in order to pay for the required imports.9

138



138 Code Economics

In this manner, the table of imports and exports over time provides a direct and economically revealing map of the unfolding patterns of spe-cialization, based on the underlying complexity of the code that coun-tries have the capacity to execute. Hidalgo and Hausmann state that the challenge of mapping variations in underlying capabilities (code) across countries with trade data “is equivalent to asking whether we can infer properties such as the diversity and exclusivity of the Lego pieces inside a child’s bucket by looking only at the models that a group of child-ren, each with different Legos, can make.” In this way, “connections between countries and products signal the availability of capabilities in a country, just like the creation of a model by a child signals the availa-bility of a specific set of Lego pieces.”10

Clearly, most of what is produced in any given country is not ex-ported. What data on traded goods reveal far better than data on overall production are the relative advantages to a country of producing various goods. The existence of these relative advantages emphasizes the point documented by Bloom and Van Reenan: that countries, just like compa-nies, have very different code, which leads to very different outcomes.11 The historical record suggests that what matters for large- scale develop-ment progress is not only the quantity of trade but the type. Places that have companies that can contribute to and benefit from global supply chains seem to have the potential to prosper; those that are disconnected from global supply chains and can contribute only basic resources, but produce nothing complex, seem to lag. As Hausmann put it, “My theory is that inequality comes from differential connectedness.”12

How have an increasing number of nations overcome the obstacle of “differential connectedness” to achieve genuine development and expand the opportunity for ever- greater numbers of their populations to contribute productively to the twenty- first- century economy? One answer is, through the development and widespread adoption of stan-dards, which enables code created in different places to be executed on different platforms as never before.

Of the drivers of beneficial trade, international standards are at once among the most important and the least appreciated. Both writing and weights and measures were standardized by the first emperor of China, Qin Shi Huangdi (221 BCE to 206 BCE), whose aim was to increase

139



Platforms 139

trade within the newly unified country. From the invention of bills of exchange in the Middle Ages, to the development of universal time in the late nineteenth century, to the creation of twenty- first- century com-munications protocols, innovations in standards have lowered the cost and enhanced the value of exchanges across distance. In the process, they have created new capabilities and opportunities on a global scale.

Standards of a company- specific variety also underlie routines of production that are the essence of global supply chains. From the sourcing of raw materials to the marketing of final goods, contracts between buyers and suppliers depend on clearly communicated ex-pectations and specifications, all facilitated by standards. For entrepre-neurs in developing countries, demonstrated conformity with interna-tional standards— particularly those established and maintained by the International Organization for Standardization and the International Electrotechnical Commission— is a universally recognized mark of or-ganizational capacity that substantially eases entry into global produc-tion and distribution networks.

Ask yourself what the greatest inventions were over the past 150 years: Penicillin? The transistor? Electric power? Each of these has been transformative, but equally compelling candidates include uni-versal time, container shipping, the TCP/ IP protocols underlying the Internet, and the GSM and CDMA standards that underlie mobile telephony. These are the technologies that make global trade possible by making code developed in one place interoperable with code devel-oped in another. Standards reduce barriers among people and shrink the world. They are now so embedded in global exchange that their impact cannot be separated from economic dynamics in general.

Standards turn a firm- level recipe into a subroutine of a larger proc-ess comprising many different recipes, which enumerates the full in-structions for the operation of a supply chain. As Paul Agnew, an early proponent of international standards, pointed out, compatibility stan-dards resolve the difficulties that arise “at the transition points— points at which the product passes from department to department within a company, or is sold by one company to another or to an individual.”13 From the sourcing of raw materials to the marketing of final goods, procurement contracts between buyers and suppliers depend on expec-tations and specifications that are clearly communicated, all facilitated

140



140 Code Economics

by standards.14 Standards thus have become increasingly important as the economy has become increasingly complex, because they enable the interoperability of firm- level recipes.

Adam Smith long ago noted the correspondence between the in-creasing complexity and interdependence of a society and its shared well- being: “It is the great multiplication of the productions of all the different arts, in consequence of the division of labour, which occa-sions, in a well- governed society, that universal opulence which extends itself to the lowest ranks of the people.”15 He famously offered the ex-ample of the woolen coat as a seemingly simple item that in fact was “the produce of the joint labor of a great multitude of workmen” (see Text Box 9.1). Yet the complexity and interdependence of the economy today is orders of magnitude greater than two centuries ago. Apple, for example, has 786 suppliers located in 31 countries around the world for the production of the iPhone. A disassembled iPhone is its own min-iature “United Nations General Assembly” with representatives from most of the countries that have the capacity to produce cellphone hard-ware and software for global supply chains.

As I described in greater detail in a recent work with Hezekiah Agwara and Brian Higginbotham, the phenomenon known as glo-balization really describes the increased interdependence among na-tions and in overall economic complexity.16 Shared standards and business practices have been a precondition for this process of eco-nomic integration. It is not a great stretch to state that globalization is standardization.17

If economies are a form of food chain, then raw materials are the plankton that exist at the bottom of the chain. They are simple in struc-ture. They don’t change much. They don’t learn much. They are essen-tial to the overall functioning of the system, but the more we evolve the less we think about them. That, indeed, is precisely the point made by Alfred North Whitehead: “Civilization advances by extending the number of operations we can perform without thinking about them.”18

In biological ecosystems, each level of the food chain depends for energy on the one below. Nanoplankton eat dissolved organic matter and particulate organic matter. Zooplankton eat nanoplankton. Small fish eat zooplankton. Large fish eat small fish. Humans eat large fish.

141



Platforms 141



Text Box 9.1 Adam Smith’s Description of an Eighteenth-Century

Supply Chain

“The woolen- coat, for example … is the produce of the joint labor

of a great multitude of workmen. The shepherd, the sorter of the

wool, the wool- comber or carder, the dyer, the scribbler, the spinner,

the weaver, the fuller, the dresser, with many others, must all join

their different arts in order to complete even this homely produc-

tion. How many merchants and carriers, besides, must have been

employed in transporting the materials from some of those work-

men to others who often live in a very distant part of the country!

How much commerce and navigation in particular, how many ship-

builders, sailors, sail- makers, rope- makers, must have been employed

in order to bring together the different drugs made use of by the

dyer, which often come from the remotest corners of the world!

What a variety of labor too is necessary in order to produce the tools

of the meanest of those workmen! To say nothing of such compli-

cated machines as the ship of the sailor, the mill of the fuller, or even

the loom of the weaver, let us consider only what a variety of labor

is requisite in order to form that very simple machine, the shears

with which the shepherd clips the wool. The miner, the builder of

the furnace for smelting the ore, the feller of the timber, the burner

of the charcoal to be made use of in the smelting- house, the brick-

maker, the brick- layer, the workmen who attend the furnace, the

mill- wright, the forger, the smith, must all of them join their differ-

ent arts in order to produce them.”19



Organisms at the top of the food chain are, generally, also the most recently evolved. Nanoplankton have been around longer than zoo-plankton. Zooplankton have been around longer than small fish. Small fish have been around longer than large fish. And large fish have been around longer than humans. In this manner, trophic levels represent not only a gradation of structure from the simplest to the most com-plex organisms, but also the gradation in evolutionary history from the earliest to the most recently evolved. To a point, the inverse cor-relation between the historical age of a species and its complexity is

142



142 Code Economics

obvious: since life requires a constant throughput of energy, organisms at higher trophic levels could not have come into being if organisms at the lower trophic levels had not been there first.

In more or less the same way, it is obvious that we can’t have a time-keeping or heart- monitoring app on a smartphone without an oper-ating system for the phone. Thus the operating system is a platform that allows the apps to run. The operating system in turn is built on a platform of standards that convert the programs in which the operating systems are written (e.g., C, C++, or UNIX) into the binary “machines language,” in which computer hardware understands instructions and stores information. The computer hardware in turn requires a constant flow of energy in order to maintain its structured state (in particular, it turns out, to reset so it can perform new functions). This requires electric power. Electric power provided through the grid is a platform technology that required decades to refine for even small geographic areas, and it continues to spread gradually across the globe. The electric power infrastructure in turn depends on a transportation infrastruc-ture, and on technologies for extracting raw materials, that enable the generation of power.

The economy consists of the provision of ever more services, deliv-ered over platforms on top of platforms. The platforms are the trophic levels of the economic ecosystem.

If goods and services are built on platforms, one atop the other, then it follows that learning at higher levels of the system should be faster than learning at lower levels, for the simple reason that learning at higher levels benefits from incremental learning all the way down. This is exactly what Doyne Farmer and his team found in their research on learning curves in an array of industries, which they presented at the 2013 Santa Fe Institute meeting I referred to above. When industries are ordered according to their place in an economic food chain, their char-acteristic rates of learning correlate with trophic levels: rates of learning in the production of “raw materials” are relatively slow, whereas they are relatively rapid for complex goods and services (see figures 9.1 and 9.2).

Awareness of this fact helps resolve some persistent disagreements among informed technology scholars. Those who focus on the extraction of raw materials will observe a high degree of volatility in prices around a gradually increasing trend, which suggests that learning is slow and

143



Platforms 143





FIGURE 9.1 Price Reductions in a Set of Commodities and Complex Products, 1960–2013.

Source: Talk given by J. Doyne Farmer at Nanyang Technological University on March 3, 2014, “An Evolutionary View of Technological Progress.”

scarcity dominates. Those who look at the delivery of services over layers of infrastructure— for example, the rates at which wireless networks share data— see exponential growth in every direction, which suggests that learning is fast and abundance dominates. The two layers coexist; indeed, the more complex layers depend on the less complex. Like the pace of biological evolution at different trophic levels, the pace of techno-logical advance at different platform levels is slow and fast, depending on whether we focus our attention on simple or complex products.

Before I bring this discussion of standards and platforms to a close, I must elaborate on the development of a top- level platform with par-ticular significance for code. The story begins with Vannevar Bush, a titanic figure of mid- twentieth- century science in the United States. Bush is best known for his work during World War II as director of the U.S. Office of Scientific Research and Development, where he led some of the most ambitious and large- scale R&D programs ever undertaken at that time (notably including the development of the atomic bomb); for his part in the development of analog computers; and as the author of Science: The Endless Frontier, which provided

144



144 Code Economics





FIGURE 9.2 Price Reductions in a Set of Commodities and Complex Products, 1960– 2013: Clustered by commodities and complex products (“technologies”). Source: Talk given by J. Doyne Farmer at Nanyang Technological University on March 3, 2014, “An Evolutionary View of Technological Progress.”

the rationale for the creation of the National Science Foundation. However, one of Bush’s most powerful and enduring contributions may be one that seemed relatively trivial at the time: an Atlantic Monthly article published in July 1945, just weeks before VJ Day— the end of World War II.

In that article, titled “As We May Think,” Bush looked ahead to the frontier of societal advance in the postwar era. His emphasis was not on the products of publicly funded science but on the capacities of privately produced tools: “The world has arrived at an age of cheap complex de-vices of great reliability; and something is bound to come of it.”20 In that essay, he envisioned how existing low- cost technologies might be further advanced and networked into a system for the storage and retrieval of ideas, which he called the memex: “Wholly new forms of encyclopedias will appear, ready made with a mesh of associative trails running through them, ready to be dropped into the memex and there amplified.” This tool would allow the forward progress of human inquiry: “[Man] has built a civilization so complex that he needs to mechanize his records more fully if he is to push his experiment to its logical conclusion and not merely become bogged down part way there by overtaxing his limited memory.” 21

145



Platforms 145

Among those who read this essay in Atlantic Monthly was a 25- year- old aerospace engineer named Douglas Engelbart, who at the time the article reached him was sitting in a hut in the South Pacific. Engelbart was so taken by the vision set forth in “As We May Think” that he redirected his career toward making that vision a reality. While working as a staff re-searcher at Stanford Research Institute, Engelbart published a report, pro-duced with funding from the U.S. Air Force Office of Scientific Research, titled “Augmenting Human Intellect: A Conceptual Framework,” which summarized his 15 years of reflection prompted by Vannevar Bush’s article. “Man’s population and gross product are increasing at a considerable rate, but the complexity of his problems grows still faster, and the urgency with which solutions must be found becomes steadily greater in response to the increased rate of activity and the increasingly global nature of that activ-ity,” he wrote. “Augmenting man’s intellect, in the sense defined above, would warrant full pursuit by an enlightened society if there could be shown a reasonable approach and some plausible benefits.”22

Among the small group of people who shared Engelbart’s vision of computers as enablers of human creativity was a psychologist and com-puter scientist named Joseph Carl Robnett Licklider, known to all as J. C. R. Licklider or, simply, “Lick.” After receiving a triple bachelor of arts degree in 1937 from Washington University in St. Louis in phys-ics, mathematics, and psychology, Licklider continued on to Harvard, where he received a PhD in psycho- acoustics and undertook a postdoc-toral fellowship at the psycho- acoustics laboratory. Licklider moved to MIT in 1950, where he became interested in the new field of informa-tion technology, and from there, in 1957, to the legendary engineering firm of Bolt Beranek and Newman, Inc. (BBN), where he developed the first time- sharing computer.

In 1960, while at BBN, Licklider published a paper titled “Man- Computer Symbiosis,” in which he, like Engelbart, described how computer networks might evolve to help humans solve complex prob-lems. Emphasizing the complementarity of human and machine capa-bilities and citing the Newell- Simon- Shaw General Problem Solver as an example, Licklider wrote the following:

Man- computer symbiosis is an expected development in cooperative

interaction between men and electronic computers. It will involve

146



146 Code Economics

very close coupling between the human and the electronic members

of the partnership. The main aims are 1) to let computers facilitate

formulative thinking as they now facilitate the solution of formu-

lated problems, and 2) to enable men and computers to cooperate in

making decisions and controlling complex situations without inflexi-

ble dependence on predetermined programs. In the anticipated sym-

biotic partnership, men will set the goals, formulate the hypotheses,

determine the criteria, and perform the evaluations. Computing ma-

chines will do the routinizable work that must be done to prepare the

way for insights and decisions in technical and scientific thinking.23

In 1962, Licklider was appointed director of the Information Processing Techniques Office at the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA). He immediately set about building a network of researchers who shared his vision at university laboratories and think tanks. Among them was Engelbart. On April 23, 1963, Licklider sent a memo to this group, lightheartedly addressed to “Members and Affiliates of the Intergalactic Computer Network.” Licklider started by apologizing for the rushed nature of his communication, then stated his objective: “I shall try to set forth some background material and some thoughts about possible interactions among the various activities in the overall enterprise for which, as you may have detected in the above subject, I am at a loss for a name.”24 Among the most urgent needs as Licklider saw them was a reliable communication protocol to link different computers on a network. “Consider the situation in which several different centers are netted together, each center being highly individualistic and having its own special language and its own special way of doing things. Is it not desirable, or even necessary for all the centers to agree upon some lan-guage or, at least, upon some conventions for asking such questions as ‘What language do you speak?’ ”25 This question would seed an ARPA project to develop just such a network.

In 1968, ARPA announced that it had awarded the contract to build what was by then called the ARPAnet to BBN. (Licklider had left ARPA in 1964, so he did not oversee the creation of the ARPAnet.) Later the same year, at the fall Joint Computer Conference, a semi-annual meeting of the then- major computing societies held in San Francisco, Engelbart took those ideas further toward practical implementation.

147



Platforms 147

He offered more than a thousand participants a demonstration of the core elements of the user architecture that would define the informa-tion revolution in the decades to come: the computer mouse, text ed-iting, hypertext, windowing, and video conferencing. The talk became known as “The Mother of All Demos.” Five years later, Vint Cerf and Bob Kahn codeveloped the TCP/ IP (the standard that underlies the global platform we know today as the Internet), improving on the com-munications protocol the ARPAnet had been constructed on.

Even as he was leading some of the largest scale scientific endeavors in history, Vannevar Bush had the vision to look ahead to an era when the greatest progress in science- based discovery would be enabled by dramatically lowering the cost of storing and sharing ideas. Douglas Engelbart further democratized that vision, prototyping an architec-ture of collaboration through standardized interfaces that has become a global infrastructure of interaction. The Internet today is a platform that enables human creativity and collaboration on a global scale.

Whereas much of Great Man- vs- Machine Debate focused on the substitution of machine for man, Bush, Engelbart, and Licklider were among those who— like Ada Lovelace— envisioned a deep complemen-tarity between computer and human work. This potential for comple-mentary human and machine work, as well as for substitution, is the starting point for Part Three.



148



149





Part three




the human advantage Q



150





Complementarity


Q 10

The Bifurcation Is Near



Mathematical reasoning may be regarded rather schematically as the ex-ercise of a combination of two faculties, which we may call intuition and ingenuity.

—Alan Turing, Systems of Logic Based on Ordinals, 1938



On November 16, 2014, before a crowd of 60,000 people gathered at Sardar Vallabhbhai Patel Stadium in Mumbai, India, the Jain monk Munishri Ajitchandrasagarji accomplished a rare feat: he perfectly re-called five hundred unrelated facts in succession. From early morning to midday, spectators approached the stadium stage, one at a time. Each showed the young monk a random object, posed a math prob-lem, or spoke a word or phrase in one of at least six languages. After the last of these five hundred participants had conveyed their random fact, the 24- year- old prodigy opened his eyes and began to recite them back. Detouring only once to fill in a blank he had left aside, he recalled every fact without error. According to his guru, the young monk had matched a feat last accomplished six centuries earlier by a Jain monk in the Mughal court of the Subahdar of Khambhat.1

“Munishri’s mind is like a computer during the download process,” said his mentor, P. P. Acharya Nayachandrasagarji. “Many processes can happen in his mind at one time.”

From a human standpoint, the young monk’s achievement is indeed astounding. An average person can reliably remember no more than



151

152



152 The Human Advantage

five to nine unrelated facts at a time.2 Since Munishri can recall five hundred, his short- term memory capacity is 50 to 100 times that of the average human.

Now consider the first digital computer, the ENIAC, whose devel-opment I described in chapter four. Constructed of 17,468 vacuum tubes and occupying a 33- by- 55- foot space, the ENIAC was a formida-ble apparatus. Yet for all its bulk it could only hold 20 numbers it its memory at a time, better than the average person but still only 1/ 25th the capacity of Munishri (see Text Box 4.1). Like a human forced to take repeated trips to the library to look up essential facts, the ENIAC operators supplemented the computer’s memory using punch cards that took it one to five seconds to read.

Where the ENIAC excelled was not in memory but in the speed at which it was able to perform computations. While a human can generally average no more than three distinct computational cycles per minute, the ENIAC could maintain a pace of 300,000; in other words, even the first digital computer could perform raw computation at 100,000 times the speed of a human.

The attainments of Jain monks notwithstanding, it turns out that humans are not very good computers.

Ricardo Hausmann, whose work I discussed in the previous chapter, once said to me during a conversation at the Santa Fe Institute, “What has happened over time is an increase in the amount of knowledge. What has not happened is an increase in the ability of humans to hold knowledge in their heads. Since we have limited brain space we embed tacit knowledge into code, and code into modularized hardware.”

Technology— the how of production— begins as an idea. Some ideas are spread as unwritten recipes, procedures, and routines, whereas others are encoded as blueprints, manuals, patents, or standard op-erating procedures. Still others may be directly encoded as hardware. Hardware that can be programmed— a general purpose computer, for example— thus becomes a new platform for encoding ideas. The pro-cess then repeats, as I described in the last chapter, and platforms are built on other platforms.

Consider the story of Gaspard Clair François Marie Riche de Prony that I related in chapter three. De Prony began with a set

153



Complementarity 153

of mathematical operations— procedures for converting one set of numbers into another set of numbers, which was useful in tax assess-ment. To perform such operations at the required scale, he converted them into routines that could be managed by human calculators, whose skill level was below that of the mathematicians who derived the original formulae. These routines were the “software” that al-lowed for the computational work to occur. Lewis Fry Richardson (see chapter four) imagined creating similar software for the compu-tation of numbers that would be useful in predicting the weather. In both cases, these routines were useful enough that they ultimately were encoded into hardware. The ENIAC team converted a known routine for integrating the Baratropic Vorticity Equation into hard-ware that was capable of performing the calculation, which enabled Richardson’s dream of predicting the weather to become a reality (see Text Box 4.1). Paul Douglas described how the widespread availabil-ity of mechanical calculators reduced the skill level required of clerks (see chapter five).

Julia Child experimented with the production of mayonnaise and encoded the results in a recipe she included in Mastering the Art of French Cooking. Publishing this recipe enabled home cooks of lesser ability than Child to prepare mayonnaise of a quality comparable to hers. Ruth Wakefield had an idea of how to make a chocolate chip cookie. After considerable experimentation, she encoded the results into a recipe that still appears on the Nestlé chocolate chip bag. She also had ideas about how to run a restaurant, which she encoded in a manual for her employees.

At each stage of production— from initial invention through re-peated innovations to automation and digitization— people’s capacity to create value progresses and the role of the human worker is rede-fined. As organizational theorist Geoff Moore puts it, “At the end of any arc of innovation, when we have gone all the way from entrepre-neur to automation, goods and services that used to be scarce and very expensive to acquire have now been made plentiful and cheap. That makes them a perfect platform upon which to build the next wave of innovation. Entrepreneurs are the ones who catch on to the implica-tions of this new state the fastest. They kick off the next round of inno-vation, they launch the next arc.”3 The journey from idea to algorithm

154



154 The Human Advantage

thus arguably typifies the evolution of any technological innovation and the new work it creates as it evolves from the spark of an idea to an ubiquitous platform.

At every stage in this process, elements of the work formerly done by humans can be done by a machine or computer. At the same time, humans are empowered to do work of a type or at a rate that was previ-ously not feasible. This is what I mean by the sequential “bifurcation” of work (See figure 10.1.).

Want an example? Look at the watch on your wrist. The first spring- driven clocks began to appear in Italy and Germany in the late 1400s. By 1524, master locksmith Peter Henlein was regularly manufacturing pocket watches in his Nuremberg shop. The technology to produce watches gradually spread to other parts of Europe, and by the seven-teenth century watch production was centered in London, Paris, and the French cities of Blois and Lyon. As it turned out, many of the most accomplished watchmakers in sixteenth- century France were mem-bers of the beleaguered Protestant minority known as the Huguenots.4 Beginning with a General Edict issued on January 29, 1536, that re-mained in effect for the next 60 years, France undertook an ill- considered and bloody campaign to expel or eliminate its Huguenot population.



Complexity Human work

Code

Platform





Measurable



Well-being



Simplicity

Autonomy Interdependence

FIGURE 10.1 Sequential Bifurcations. Source: Author.

155



Complementarity 155

Many Huguenots fled to Switzerland— primarily to French- speaking Geneva— where their freedom of worship was protected. When they fled to Geneva, they took their watchmaking skills with them. As a result, Switzerland— a landlocked, mountainous, and fiercely indepen-dent nation— suddenly had a watch industry.

Buyers in Europe regarded the first watches produced by the na-scent Swiss industry much as Americans viewed Japanese cars in the 1970s: crude compared to those manufactured at the established pro-duction centers in London and Paris but redemptively cheap and func-tional. Consequently, also like Japanese cars, the early Swiss watches found a market niche and sold well.

In Geneva, following a pattern prevalent in other industries, the most successful watchmakers soon organized themselves into a guild. Their aim was to govern market entry and restrict competition among existing firms. As the city prospered further from the watch trade, incumbent producers successfully enacted laws that excluded both immigrants and women from employment in watchmaking and re-served work in the trade exclusively for citoyens (citizens) and the bourgeois (burghers). An interval of remarkable if concentrated pros-perity for Geneva ensued. Watchmaking created a Protestant middle class in democratic Switzerland that was in the vanguard of change during Europe’s Age of Enlightenment, which is generally dated from the early seventeenth century to the late eighteenth century. Jean- Jacques Rousseau— author of The Social Contract, an early scientific theorist and an inspiration to both the French Revolution and Mary Shelley’s Frankenstein— was the son of a third- generation Genevan watchmaker.5

As Geneva’s watch industry developed through the late 1600s, the city faced a challenge: with the watchmaking talent among the citoyens and bourgeois already fully employed, how could the industry con-tinue to grow without relaxing the restrictions on employment, which had helped watchmakers earn their high incomes and elevated social standing? The solution, of course, was to outsource. (If you’re starting to read “Geneva ca. 1650” as “USA ca. 1995,” you’re getting the sub-text.) Rather than permit immigrants or women to be employed in the workshops of Geneva, the Swiss standardized watchmaking tasks and sent piecework out to people living in the poor villages and towns in

156



156 The Human Advantage

the Jura Mountains. These were inconsequential places, including one by the name of Neuchâtel.

The guilds held little sway in these mountain villages. Paying no mind to Genevan employment restrictions, producers in Neuchâtel and elsewhere in the Jura organized watch production around a model that suited their circumstances and predispositions. Rather than bringing workers together in a single workshop, they broke the piecework down into repetitive tasks that created production efficien-cies best attained by a division of labor. Once the door of opportunity was opened to the shepherds of the Jura, they did not hesitate to rush through it. Entire families participated in making watches, includ-ing children, of course, who were adept at assembling small, delicate mechanisms.

Fast- forward to 1967. It was in Neuchâtel, at the Centre Electronique Horloger, that the first prototype quartz wristwatch was unveiled. The Japanese firm Seiko released a prototype quartz wrist-watch the same year. Quartz watches were as accurate as mechani-cal timepieces but far easier to construct, and by the 1980s quartz wristwatches were dominating the market. They were produced by the millions on assembly lines, and reliable timekeeping became a commodity. As early as 1982, the journal Assembly Automation pub-lished a paper titled “Robots Start to Assemble Watches.”6 Further disruption of the watch industry occurred in the 1990s due to the availability of a low- cost alternative— mobile phones. As cell phones began to be sold widely in the 2000s, timekeeping became one app among many on the portable digital computers we have come to know as smartphones.

The average watch had completed a 500- year journey from a deli-cate timepiece assembled high in the Jura mountains to lines of code stored and processed on a smartphone. Did this end the Swiss watch-making industry? Well, not exactly. Switzerland— once the dominant watchmaking nation— today produces fewer than 5 percent of the timepieces manufactured for export globally. In 2014, Switzerland ex-ported 29 million watches, as compared to China’s 669 million (the global leader in terms of volume). But what of value? That is a different story: Swiss watch exports were worth $24.3 billion in 2014, nearly five times as much as all Chinese watches combined. It turns out that the

157



Complementarity 157

highest quality handmade watches are more valued than ever— as is the craftsmanship of the most capable watchmakers and designers who produce those watches.

As a sequence of new technologies delivered timekeeping services at rapidly diminishing costs— first through quartz watches then via smartphones— the Swiss watch industry managed not only to survive but to thrive. The creation of a low- price, high- volume timekeeping option strengthened the market for a differentiated higher price, low- volume option.

In short, the market bifurcated. Such bifurcations have occurred across time and across industries. Movies are one good example: as a sequence of new technologies have appeared to deliver home enter-tainment at a rapidly diminishing cost— first through videotapes, then DVDs, then online streaming— movie theaters have managed not only to survive but to thrive. They have done so by providing a lower volume, higher- priced option that incorporated a sequence of amenities not available at home, from Dolby Surround Sound to IMAX to 3D.

Visual art services are another example of a sequence of new technol-ogies that deliver services at rapidly diminishing costs— first through photocopying and then digitization. Like movie theaters, the fine art market also has managed not only to survive but to thrive, as the very ubiquity of copies increased the value of authenticity.

The music industry, too, welcomed a sequence of new technologies, which delivered music with visuals at a rapidly diminishing cost— first through CDs and then through streaming services— while the live per-formance market has not only survived but thrived. Digital music cre-ates a kind of personal connection between fan and musician— both global pop stars and YouTubers— and demand for in- person contact is intense.

In each instance, disruptive advances in code followed a consistent and predictable pattern: the creation of a new high- volume, low- price option creates a new market for the low- volume, high- price option. Every time this happens, the new value created through improved code forces a bifurcation of markets, and of work.

If there is one place in the United States that has come to define the implosion of the U.S. manufacturing- based economy, it is Detroit,

158



158 The Human Advantage

Michigan. Detroit’s challenges are so well known that they do not re-quire recounting here. But one Detroit story that is worth telling has to do with a recent manufacturing success— one that doesn’t have to do with cars but with a much older consumer technology: watches.

In a building that once housed the General Motors design studio, craftspeople at a four- year- old company called Shinola hand- assemble high- end watches from Swiss parts. The company grew rapidly in the two years following its founding; in its third year it assembled 150,000 high- end watches and earned $60 million. Shinola’s success is due in equal measure to the quality of its product and the power of its story. The company gives its employees and its customers an opportunity to be part of an undertaking that conveys a purpose beyond a minute- to- minute tracking of time.

If Shinola’s success seems like an anecdotal aberration that does not reflect larger trends, then consider again what happened to the Swiss watch industry after the introduction of the low- cost, highly reliable quartz watch. Were it not for market bifurcation, the Swiss watch in-dustry would have disappeared, crushed by the low- cost, high- volume capacity of Asian producers. Yet, as described above, the development of quartz watches did not eliminate the mechanical watch industry but instead forced a bifurcation of markets and of work. This process is the norm, not the exception, when technology disrupts work.

We can take this as far back as we like. Ten thousand years ago, agricultural technologies forced a bifurcation of work. Four hundred years ago, the bifurcation was caused by trade technologies. One hun-dred years ago, manufacturing technologies forced a bifurcation of work, and today’s automation technologies and artificial intelligence are doing the same.

Because work is fundamentally algorithmic, it is capable of almost limitless diversification through both combinatorial and incremental change. The algorithms of work become, fairly literally, the DNA of the economy. Such bifurcations can, and do, occur without limit.

The question is, therefore, not whether opportunities for meaning-ful work will exist but how they will be compensated. As Geoff Moore puts it, “Digital innovation is reengineering our manufacturing- based product- centric economy to improve quality, reduce cost, expand mar-kets, increase profits, and reward investment— all of which are very

159



Complementarity 159

good things. It is doing so, however, largely at the expense of traditional middle class jobs. This class of work is bifurcating into elite professions that are highly compensated but outside the skillset of the target pop-ulation and commoditizing workloads for which the wages fall well below the target level.”7

The counterintuitive but pervasive reality is that technological ad-vances have humanized work in the past and should do so in the future. Therefore, adapting to a world where computers can think is just the beginning.

The hard part for humans, of course, will be to redefine what it means to be human in the first place.

One cliché of the technology world is that, if you’re not paying for a service, you’re the product. While the negative implications of this sen-tence may or may not hold for Internet services such as Gmail, Twitter, and Facebook, it does a pretty good job of explaining the relationship between insured patients and the U.S. healthcare system. This is be-cause, while insured patients certainly pay for healthcare via their pre-miums, they do not bear the full cost of the procedures performed on them. (That, of course, is the point of having insurance.) As a result, healthcare providers have a strong incentive to maximize the revenue they can generate through any interaction with a patient. “Better” in-surance only makes this dynamic worse.

The way out of this dilemma is simple: Turn the patient into the doctor. Allow individuals and communities to be the authors of their own healthcare. Far from utopian, this vision of a distributed health- service delivery system is in the process of becoming a reality, thanks to an array of loosely connected innovations in code, one of which takes the form of a 600- year- old technology: yes, the watch.

Prompted by the popularity of the first- generation wearable com-puters capable of gathering basic health data, first Apple and now Google have developed multifunction watches that integrate health analytics into users’ daily lived experience. A parallel race is ongoing among major technology and healthcare companies, with the full sup-port of the government, to develop increasingly powerful diagnostic aids that mine troves of anonymized data to identify patterns of health and illness. Such diagnostic aids are not yet, and will not be for the

160



160 The Human Advantage

foreseeable future, a full substitute for the judgment and discretion of trained health professionals. However, they can provide guidance to a new generation of healthcare coaches whose role will not be to initiate medical interventions but to help people gain a greater awareness of their own health status and guide them toward behaviors that, in the current model, fall in the domain of prevention rather than treatment.

If this seems too good to be true, consider the story of Stephen Keating. In 2007, during a routine scan, Keating’s doctors noticed a slight abnormality in his brain. He was advised that it was nothing to worry about but that he should monitor it. So he did, educating himself on the structure of the brain and obtaining a follow- up scan in 2010. Again, the scan showed no abnormalities.

However, in the summer of 2014, Keating began to smell vinegar when no vinegar was present. He was aware from his research that his particular abnormality was near the part of the brain responsible for smells, so he had another MRI. This time doctors found a cancerous tumor the size of a tennis ball, which they removed.

Throughout the process, Keating had aggressively sought data on his condition. By the time doctors removed the tumor from his brain, he had collected over 70 gigabytes of medical documentation on his case. The data were so detailed that he was able to model and print a 3D scale model of his tumor.

Granted, Keating had a considerable advantage in patient- led mon-itoring and diagnostics, as he is a doctoral student at the MIT Media Lab. But code- enabled diagnostic tools have the potential to reinforce and accelerate the rapid growth of peer- to- peer service provision, which is finally reaching healthcare. One example is the rapid growth of the Village Movement, a new approach to delivering healthcare services to people over 60 years of age that allows them to stay in their homes. The village model allows people to live at home past the point when they might otherwise have had to move to an institutional care facility, and does so without creating undue burdens for their families.8

While pharmacological and surgical approaches to treating illness will continue to advance as the global population ages, analogies to other mature industries strongly suggest that the greatest advances in the provision of healthcare services will come from a combination of wearable technologies, diagnostics supported by Big Data applications, peer- to- peer operations, and other innovations in code that distribute

161



Complementarity 161

healthcare delivery away from the highly centralized models that came to dominate in the twentieth century.

In considering how code and work will coevolve in the next two to three decades, the case of healthcare provision is a particularly impor-tant one for the United States. As is well known, the growth of health-care and education costs has outpaced inflation for decades; healthcare now comprises 17 percent of U.S. GDP, compared with 7 percent in 1970.9 Healthcare and education are the only two sectors in the econ-omy in which job growth has remained consistently strong following the Great Recession.10 As a result, as is much discussed, technological trends affecting these sectors are those likely to have a significant mac-roeconomic impact.

However, the changes underway in the healthcare system also illus-trate broader trends in the coevolution of code and work that are rel-evant across sectors. The entire network of services I have described as representing the future of healthcare delivery is built on platforms of earlier code- based innovations that have become sufficiently ubiquitous and reliable that they now constitute a shared infrastructure for future innovation. Foremost among these is the complex set of standards, con-tracts, hardware, and conventions that we refer to as the Internet, and the separate set of institutional and technological innovations that have enabled mobile telephony. Layered on these platforms are operating sys-tems that allow specific devices to run programs, on which are layered the programs and data- access protocols that allow the device to serve alternately as a health monitor, a coach, an alarm … or, simply, a watch.

The diffusion of simple machines invented in the nineteenth cen-tury gradually increased the efficiency of agricultural production and construction processes during the first half of the twentieth century, thus reducing the need for agricultural workers and non- farm laborers, respectively. Industrial production based on increasingly sophisticated management routines and machinery first drew workers into factories as it increased in scale, then beginning in the 1990s it sent them away as the efficiency of those processes increased further through automation and required fewer physical laborers (see figure 10.2). Knowledge work based on increasingly sophisticated management routines and technology has drawn workers into office cubicles as it has increased in scale; will it now send those workers away as algorithms become more powerful and data

162



162 The Human Advantage

Percent

0 5 10 15 20 25

Professional, technical,

and kindred

Service workers,

except private household

Clerical and kindred

Managers, officials,

and proprietors

Sales workers 1910

2000

Craftsmen, foremen,

and kindred

Operatives and kindred

Laborers, except

farmers and mine

Private household

service workers

Farmers

Farm laborers

0 5 10 15 20 25

Percent

FIGURE 10.2 Proportional Employment in Occupational Categories, 1910 and 2000. Source: Ian D. Wyatt and Daniel E. Hecker (2006), “Occupational changes during the 20th century”, Monthly Labor Review (Bureau of Labor Statistics), March; p. 36, chart 1.



more ubiquitous? Will machines driven by increasingly powerful com-puters end up being our liberators, or will they become our unbeatable competitors in the workplace of the future? More generally, does tech-nology destroy or create jobs? The answer, of course, is that it does both.

The advance of code empowers us at the same time it permits algo-rithms and machines to replace us.

163



Complementarity 163

Following David Ricardo’s argument that countries lacking an abso-lute productive advantage in the production of any good can nonethe-less find mutual profit in trade on the basis of comparative advantage, Herbert Simon posited that we humans will always find domains of comparative advantage for our own labor relative to machines, re-gardless of how productive machines become. “Human employment will become smaller in those kinds of occupations and activities in which automatic devices have the greatest comparative advantage over humans,” Simon predicted in 1960. “Human employment will become relatively greater in those occupations and activities in which automatic devices have the least comparative advantage.”11

Exceptionally among his contemporaries, Simon understood that “automation” would extend well beyond the factory floor: “We should not make the simple assumption that the higher status occupations, and those requiring the most education, are going to be the least auto-mated. There are perhaps as good prospects technically and economi-cally for automating completely the job of a physician, a corporate vice- president, or a college teacher, as for automating the job of a man who operates a piece of earth- moving equipment.”12

And yet, more than a half- century ago, Simon also understood in-tuitively what research has since established: as the power of computers increased, work would bifurcate, with computers performing the tasks most readily subject to algorithmic definition while humans perform those most resistant. He stated:

It may seem paradoxical to think we can increase the productivity

of mechanized techniques in all processes without displacing men

somewhere. Won’t a point be reached where men are less produc-

tive than machines in all processes, hence economically unemploya-

ble? The paradox is dissolved by supplying a missing term. Whether

man or machines will be employed in a particular process depends

not simply on their relative productivity in physical terms, but on

their cost as well. And cost depends on price. Hence— so goes the

traditional argument of economics— as technology changes and

machines become more productive, the prices of labor and capital

will adjust themselves as to clear the market of both. As much of

each will be employed as offers itself at the market price, and the

164



164 The Human Advantage

market price will be proportional to the marginal productivity of

that factor.13

While this description of comparative advantage derives directly from David Ricardo, Simon advances the conventional story of com-parative advantage significantly with a subtle decision to use the word “process” rather than “occupation” in this critical passage: “By oper-ation of the market place, manpower will flow to those processes in which productivity is high relative to the productivity of machines; it will leave those processes in which its productivity is relatively low.”14

In other words, as technology evolves, the processes of work— code— undergo sequences of bifurcations, with humans focusing on the tasks in which their skills are comparatively strong, while machines (now computers) take on the tasks in which their skills are comparatively strong. Furthermore, such bifurcations occur not by chance but as the result of an inexorable evolutionary logic that constantly shifts the landscape of opportunity.

The best labor market analyses supporting Simon’s line of argument come from a sequence of papers and one book published over the past dozen years by MIT economists David Autor, Daron Acemoglu, and Frank Levy, and Harvard economist Richard Murnane, in various com-binations and with other coauthors. In a seminal 2003 paper published in the Quarterly Journal of Economics, Autor, Levy, and Murnane summa-rized their findings based on an analysis of three decades of census data:

We contend that computer capital (1) substitutes for a limited and

well- defined set of human activities, those involving routine (repeti-

tive) cognitive and manual tasks; and (2) complements activities in-

volving non- routine problem solving and interactive tasks. Provided

these tasks are imperfect substitutes, our model implies measura-

ble changes in the task content of employment, which we explore

using representative data on job task requirements over 1960– 1998.

Computerization is associated with declining relative industry

demand for routine manual and cognitive tasks and increased rela-

tive demand for non- routine cognitive tasks.15

From the Autor, Acemoglu, Levy, and Murnane (or “AALM”) perspec-tive, the impact of digital disruption on the future of work depends critically on the nature of the work itself— in other words, the how of

165



Complementarity 165

production and not just the what (see figure 10.3). Routine tasks that can easily be encoded will be performed by computers, and those that cannot will continue to be performed by people. The jobs of the “human computers” at the Philadelphia Computing Section I described in chap-ter four are a case in point: because the human computers were perform-ing exactly the same rule- based logical computations that are the essence of computer programs, they were also literally the first people to lose their jobs to digital computers. Summing up a decade of research, Autor writes, “The interplay between machine and human comparative allows computers to substitute for workers in performing routine, codifiable tasks while amplifying the comparative advantage for workers in supply-ing problem solving skills, adaptability, and creativity.”16

62

60

58

istribution

56

Task D 54

52

50

rcentiles of 1960 48 1960 1970 1980 1990 2000

Pe 46

nput 44

Task I 42

ean 40 M

38

Nonroutine analytic Nonroutine interactive Nonroutine manual Routine cognitive Routine manual

FIGURE 10.3 Trends in Routine and Nonroutine Task Input, 1960 to 1998. This figure “is constructed using Dictionary of Occupational Titles [1977] task measures by gender and occupation paired to employment data for 1960 and 1970 Census and 1980, 1990, and 1998 Current Population Survey (CPS) samples. Data are ag-gregated to 1120 industry- gender- education cells by year, and each cell is assigned a value corresponding to its rank in the 1960 distribution of task input (calculated across the 1120, 1960 task cells). Plotted values depict the employment- weighted mean of each assigned percentile in the indicated year.” Source: Autor, David H., Frank Levy and Richard J. Murnane (2003). “The Skill Content of Recent Technological Change: An Empirical Exploration.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics 118 (4): 1279– 1333.

166



166 The Human Advantage

Complementing the work by the AALM team, the most thoughtful historical and microeconomic analysis of the coevolution of code and work has been done by James Bessen, whom I quoted in chapter one. Bessen is something of a modern- day David Ricardo, having been suc-cessful as an entrepreneur before putting his energies into being at the forefront of economic theory. In 1983, Bessen wrote the first What- You- See- Is- What- You- Get (WYSIWYG) desktop publishing program (a category dominated for the past couple of decades by Microsoft Word), which ran on the first IBM PC with a luxurious 64K of RAM and a special graphics card.

In his insightful book, Learning by Doing: The Real Connection be-tween Innovation, Wages, and Wealth, Bessen describes the impact the introduction of automated teller machines (ATMs) had on the banking industry. The name of the technology itself suggested that ATMs would be a major job destroyer: after all, their purpose was to automate the work of tellers. President Barack Obama articulated a widely held per-spective when he stated in a 2011 interview that “there are some struc-tural issues with our economy where a lot of businesses have learned to become much more efficient with a lot fewer workers. You see it when you go to a bank and you use an ATM, you don’t go to a bank teller, or you go to the airport and you’re using a kiosk instead of check-ing in at the gate.”17 Yet an analysis of the data tells a very different story: while the number of ATMs installed grew from barely 50,000 in 1985 to over 400,000 in 2010, the number of human bank tellers actually also increased, from 485,000 in 1985 to slightly over 600,000 in 2010. How did this happen? The fact that ATMs took over many routinized tasks allowed tellers to focus on more complex tasks: “ATM technology did not eliminate bank tellers, it did change the way tellers work and the skills they require,” Bessen explains. “They now perform relatively fewer simple transactions in favor of complex ones, and they provide the personal service that is an important part of ‘relationship banking.’ ” The creation of ATMs also— counter- intuitively perhaps— sparked a rapid growth in the number of bank branches. “Because ATMs perform many teller transactions, fewer tellers are needed to op-erate a bank branch. But because it costs less to operate a branch office, banks dramatically increased the number of branches in order to reach

167



Complementarity 167

a bigger market. More bank branches means more tellers, despite fewer tellers per branch.”18

Trends were similar for bookkeepers (presumably displaced by ac-counting software), sales clerks (presumably displaced by online shopping), and even independent booksellers (presumably displaced by Amazon). Bessen reports: “Amazon may have eliminated jobs at Borders and other national book chains that relied on bestsellers, but the number of independent booksellers has been growing and with it, more jobs for sales clerks who can provide selections and advice that Amazon cannot easily match.”19

Let us say that the economy evolves through a sequence of bifurcations in the way I have described in this chapter, which at each stage of dis-continuous advance in code creates both a new low- cost, high- volume option and a high- cost, low- volume option. What does that process tell us about the relative returns to workers and the owners of capital? Even if work is humanized by the advance of code, as I claim, that does not mean it will be remunerated equitably. Even if the median quality of life continues to improve, as I claim, that does not mean the gap be-tween the wealthiest and the poorest will shrink or that everyone will have the opportunity to contribute productively to society.

A widely discussed study conducted in 2013 at Oxford University concluded that 47 percent of workers in the United States have jobs in categories that will be vulnerable to automation in the next decade.20 While an apparently startling finding (if accurate even on its own terms), it actually tells us very little about how many jobs within those catego-ries will be eliminated as a consequence of automation, and it tells us even less about the manner in which code within those occupations— the daily practice of work— will shift as a result of new technological capabilities or whether and how people will adapt to those shifts.

This imperative of adaptation at the personal level is the subject of the next chapter.





Education




Q 11

The Game of Life



Learn how to cook— try new recipes, learn from your mistakes, be fearless, and above all, have fun!

—Julia Child, My Life in France, 2006



In 1960, U.S. game- manufacturer Milton Bradley introduced its clas-sic version of The Game of Life, which has been played by millions of people in the decades since. You may recall how the game is played: At the start, in your “youth,” you decide whether or not to go to col-lege. This choice, combined with a part- of- the- game desire to maximize income and an element of randomness, determine which career you select. You acquire an automobile and, in time, a spouse and children. (The car has room for four children, but you can get a second car at no cost.) You proceed through various adventures, earning a regular salary and steadily accumulating wealth along the way. At the end of the game you retire— presumably precisely at the prescribed age of 65. Upon re-tirement you have the option of entering the exclusive “Millionaire Estates” community or settling for the relatively modest but perfectly adequate “Countryside Acres.” There is little doubt as to which of these is preferable.

Aggregate data on occupational choice and the returns from edu-cation in the decades since 1960 seem to validate the assumptions underlying The Game of Life: since the late 1970s, the economically fortunate among us have been those who made the “go to college” choice. This group has seen its income grow rapidly and its share of

168

169



Education 169

the aggregate wealth increase sharply. Those without a college educa-tion have watched their income stagnate and their share of the ag-gregate wealth decline. Among white males age 45 to 55 in the United States today— the economically dominant segment of the popula-tion in previous generations— the economic contrast between col-lege graduates and those without a degree has been particularly grim. Middle- age white male college graduates (my cohort) have done very well: their incomes have grown in real terms and they are living longer than previous generations. Middle- age white men without a college degree have been beset by sharply rising death rates— a phe-nomenon that contrasts starkly with middle- age Latino and African American men, and with trends in nearly every other country in the world.1

This divergence between the expected outcomes for college gradu-ates and for those without a college education reinforces an economic theory about the optimal life path known as the permanent income hy-pothesis, which was developed by Nobel Laureate in Economics Milton Friedman three years before the introduction of The Game of Life. This hypothesis mirrors the premise of the game: Early in life we optimize our lifetime earnings by going into debt to invest in education, which delivers the foundational skills on which we build a career. When we begin our career we stop investing in education and start to save, and we continue to save until we retire. When we retire we spend down our savings while doing the only other thing left: we prepare to die. Ideally we do this on schedule, as living longer than expected is a problem in this model (not enough savings!).

The model Friedman developed is as technically sound today as it was in 1957. Furthermore, the permanent income hypothesis— somewhat like the efficient markets hypothesis, which was developed at the University of Chicago at about the same time— has become encoded not only in the widely played board game but in the operat-ing system of the U.S. economy in such fundamental ways that we barely notice its influence. From the Pell Grants that sustain college students to the 401(k)s that enable employees to save for retirement, the experience of workers from youth to death remains framed by the notion that institutions are changing sufficiently slowly and we are sufficiently short- lived that we can make a one- time investment in

170



170 The Human Advantage

education at the start of our lives to reap a reward that we enjoy at the end of our lives.

An updated and empirically validated version of The Game of Life remains the way that the most prominent economists look at the world of work today. In 2008, Harvard’s Claudia Goldin and Lawrence Katz published The Race Between Education and Technology, the most com-prehensive treatment to that point of the relationship between educa-tion, the advance of technology, and the evolution of work. Picking up on the research by Paul Douglas on the decline in the wage premium for white-collar workers that I discussed in chapter 5, and employing a vari-ant of the Cobb- Douglas production function (see Text Box 5.2) as the basis for their data analysis, Goldin and Katz find that, while machines did substitute for skilled labor in nineteenth- century manufacturing by replacing artisans with factory workers, by the early twentieth century, technology and worker skill had become complementary. Furthermore, while the wage premium for high school- and college- educated workers continued to fall for nearly two- and- a- half decades after Paul Douglas published his 1926 study, in 1950 the trend reversed sharply and the wage premium for educated workers expanded at a rapid pace for the rest of the twentieth century.

What drove Goldin and Katz’s results and made possible what they refer to as the “Human Capital Century in America”? They focus on two historical discontinuities that occurred at the end of the nineteenth century and the beginning of the twentieth century in the United States. The first discontinuity was the shift from artisan production (craft, with little division of labor) to “batch and continuous- process production” (the modern factory floor, including the assembly line, as well as the factory- like clerical work that was the focus of W. H. Leffingwell’s work).2 The second discontinuity was in changes in the minimum educational attainment required of workers. Working on a farm, or as an apprentice to a craftsman, did not require the sort of ed-ucation provided in high school, let alone at a college. But working in a factory, and certainly as a clerk, did increasingly require a high school education— and, later, a college degree. Considering the joint impact of these two discontinuities, Goldin and Katz find that the real returns from investment in formal education have been high for decades, and

171



Education 171

remain so. The takeaway for young people is clear: Go to college. For policymakers the takeaway is comparable and equally direct: Invest in formal education and thereby obtain greater levels of technological ad-vance, increased productivity, a more rapid rate of economic growth, and a higher standard of living.

Delving more deeply into the specifics of factory- floor processes during the early industrial era in the United States, however, James Bessen arrives at a very different picture of the relationship between education, the advance of technology, and the evolution of work— both in the past and in the present.

Bessen takes issue with the finding by Goldin and Katz that the mechanization of production in the late nineteenth century was “de- skilling” in the sense that skilled artisans were replaced in the labor force by unskilled factory workers. Instead, he finds the first factory workers were hackers and tinkerers who were very much involved in the actual work of developing the production algorithms that drove the first industrial revolution in the United States.3 Using detailed micro data on textile production in the United States in the nineteenth and early twentieth century, Bessen is able to approximate closely the actual factory- level production recipe that mills employed at differ-ent points in time, evidencing “how the mills actually responded to changes in interest rates and prices, how different inventions affected the amount of labor time a weaver needed to spend on each loom, and how output grew with weaver skills.” With the same datasets, Bessen is further able to construct a learning curve over the period of decades, finding that while a handloom weaver in 1800 required nearly forty minutes to weave a yard of coarse cloth using a single loom, a weaver in 1902 could do the same work operating eighteen Northrop looms in less than a minute, on average. This striking point relates to the relative importance of the accumulation of capital to the advance of code: “Of the roughly thirty- nine- minute reduction in labor time per yard, capital accumulation due to the changing cost of capital relative to wages accounted for just 2 percent of the reduction; inventions ac-counted for 73 percent of the reduction; and 25 percent of the time saving came from greater skill and effort of the weavers.”4 Bessen con-cludes: “Technology was, by far, the most important factor driving the growth in output per worker in cotton weaving. Skills were important,

172



172 The Human Advantage

too, but the role of capital accumulation was minimal, counter to the conventional wisdom.”5

What was the role of formal education in this process? Essentially non existent. The processes in question were new and still evolving, so learning and training by necessity happened on the job. This point gen-eralizes, with important implications for our anticipation of the future as well as our understanding of the past: “Formal vocational education is difficult to conduct during the early stages of a technology, but easier later on, when knowledge becomes more standardized. Conversely, workers who are more adept at learning, perhaps because they have more general education, are more valuable early on. But as a technology matures, demand for workers with advanced general education often declines, while the supply of workers with vocational education rises.”6 A lag exists between the introduction of a new technology and the de-velopment of the standards and institutions that are a prerequisite for formal education. Until sufficient experience within an industry has accumulated to define the “best practices” that can form the basis of formal educational programs, there is a high reward for experience and general- purpose problem solvers. Only after tasks have been routinized does opportunity open up for workers with less experience or capacity to tinker and hack. For this reason, “it takes a long time for technical knowledge to be developed, longer for it to spread, and even longer for institutions to emerge, such as new labor markets, that allow ordinary workers to benefit from their new knowledge. Such learning on a mass scale was and is a difficult problem for society.”7

New, transformative technologies tend not to be simple and easy to copy. Instead, such technologies tend to be complex and difficult to master. This perhaps obvious fact has far- reaching implications that run against the implications of a range of default models in both micro- and macroeconomics. “Complexity explains in the first instance why learn-ing by doing takes time: complicated technologies involve many pa-rameters that must be controlled,” not to mentioned codified. “Finding efficient combinations of these parameters takes a lot of searching. As a consequence, knowledge of new technologies is often initially tentative and uncertain: Much of the knowledge is gained through experience and experiment and cannot be easily communicated; much of it may be tacit.”8

173



Education 173

Bessen provides original data and insightful analysis regarding the re-lationship between the advance of code and the evolution of work over the past century. For Bessen, formal education and basic research are not the keys to the development of economies that they are often repre-sented as being. What drives the development of economies is learning by doing and the advance of code— processes that are driven at least as much by non- expert tinkering as by formal research and instruction. “Many people fail to appreciate the complexity and slow pace of the current transition [in the world of work, due to the advance of dig-ital technology] because they confuse technology with inventions and they confuse skill with education,” Bessen states.9 “Technology is more than just inventions because implementation involves a lot of mun-dane technical knowledge and specialized skills, often among diverse people.”10

Vint Cerf is worried about the Internet— specifically about how it is going to affect the well- being of workers in the future.

Cerf is particularly well placed to comment on the Internet, since he played a central role in creating it. His particular contribution was to solve the problem posed by J. C. R. Licklider in his 1963 memo (see chapter nine) by developing, with Bob Kahn, the TCP/ IP, which con-stitutes the Internet’s core architecture and is the standard that allows computers to communicate with each other.11

In 2012, Cerf and physicist- turned- journalist David Nordfors co-founded a network called Innovation for Jobs— I4J— that is focused on determining how innovation might be directed toward net job cre-ation. Meetings of the group have included more than two hundred leaders in business, government, nonprofits, academia, and media, all of whom are seeking to understand how the continued advance of code will affect the future of work.

Cerf and other I4J members are motivated by a shared understand-ing that humans are not particularly good at being computers, and thus that a large number of current jobs that involve tasks that can be con-verted to code and automated will soon no longer provide viable sal-aried work. Indeed, many of the frontier business models shaping the economy today are based on enabling a sharp reduction in the number of people required to perform existing tasks. As venture capitalist and

174



174 The Human Advantage

I4J member Steve Jurvetson puts it, “We only invest in businesses that reduce labor. They’re always massively more efficient than their prede-cessor, or we wouldn’t invest in them.”12 For the total number of jobs involved in providing goods and services to increase rather than de-cline in the future, Jurvetson would have to be wrong. He isn’t. This means that if people are to have opportunities for meaningful work in the future to an extent comparable to today, new forms of work must evolve.

“How do I educate people for jobs that don’t exist yet? This is a real challenge for people who are in the business of education,” Cerf ob-served recently to a group of I4J members. “There is a fairly long pipe-line … How do the parties who are supposedly educating us, or how do we as the parties who are supposedly learning something, prepare for jobs that don’t exist yet?”

Cerf relates this point to the default mode of the education system: “This whole model of ‘I get educated, I work, I retire’ may in fact be dead.”

Cerf is not alone in questioning whether education in its current form is the answer to the workforce challenges posed by digital dis-ruption. In a recent column in the New York Times, Robert Shiller wrote, “Most people complete the majority of their formal education by their early 20s and expect to draw on it for the better part of a century … But a computer can learn in seconds most of the factual information that people will get in high school and college, and there will be a great many generations of new computers and robots, im-proving at an exponential rate, before one long human lifetime has passed.” Colleges and universities have yet to respond adequately to these changes, Shiller concluded. “We will have to adapt as informa-tion technology advances … We must continually re- evaluate what is inherently different between human and computer learning.”13

Over the past decade, a plethora of economic analyses and books have made the case for a fundamental discontinuity between the coming economic future and the recent economic past. Depending on how this transition is framed, we are experiencing the onset of the Sharing Economy, the Gig Economy, the 1099 Economy, the Freelance Economy, the On- Demand Economy, or the Platform Economy. In a

175



Education 175

separate category but closely related are the relocalization of produc-tion and the return to craftsmanship— the Farm- to- Table Movement, the Slow Food Movement, and the Maker Movement. Each of these movements, and the analyses that accompany them, are describing dif-ferent dimensions of very real shifts in the nature of code and the world of work.

Among those who have written recently about this transition, none has better understood and conveyed its core dynamics than Robin Chase, cofounder of the ride- sharing platform Zipcar. “Over the past two centuries, the industrial economy rewarded a specific type of cap-italist,” she observes in her book, Peers Inc. “To survive and thrive in-volved becoming just a smidge smaller than a monopoly, controlling the market while avoiding regulation … Products and services were standardized because high volumes led to economies of scale and the ability to offer lower- priced products. Higher volumes also meant in-creased market share. Then the Internet happened.”14

What the Internet did was turn what had been a source of strength for market- dominant companies— their scale and proprietary knowledge— into a potential weakness. The result has been a shift from the corporate- centric economy of the twentieth century to the increas-ingly peer- to- peer economy of the twenty- first century.

To be sure, until the latter third of the nineteenth century, the peer- to- peer economy in the United States was the economy: Large corpo-rations providing consumer services simply did not exist. Regulation governing consumer services was minimal. People provided services personally to other people who were very much like them. There were no call centers, no focus groups or strategic- planning retreats. The ar-chetypal nineteenth- century entrepreneur hung up a shingle on Main Street and set to work.

Markets up through the nineteenth century were not the anony-mous and abstract entities they sometimes appear to be today. They were physical spaces where people met to trade items they often had created or harvested themselves. This of course is what markets were originally about: realizing the productive possibilities of people.

At its human core, then, the peer- to- peer or sharing economy is not a new phenomenon. Were Alexis de Tocqueville to write about the United States of today, he likely would see a distinctly American

176



176 The Human Advantage

character in peer- to- peer businesses. The question, therefore, is whether there is anything fundamentally new about the sorts of peer- to- peer businesses that have been proliferating over the past five years. The answer is yes. The difference between the past and the present is the platforms people use to find one another, conduct transactions, and establish reputations.

The triad of revolutions in computation, communications, and al-gorithmic power that have unfolded over the past half- century have dramatically lowered the cost of finding providers of a service, assess-ing their reliability, and concluding a contract to engage their services. A quarter of a century ago, the first Internet commerce companies brought consumer markets into new “virtual” spaces. Companies like eBay and Amazon (via Amazon Marketplace) made it newly possible for regular folks to find and exchange goods across large distances. Peer- to- peer businesses employ the same sort of powerful platforms to enable the exchange of services. Since services make up more than 84 percent of the U.S. economy and an increasingly comparable per-centage in countries elsewhere, this is a big deal.

Lisa Gansky, author of The Mesh and cofounder of the photo- sharing site Ofoto, was among the first to illustrate the popularity of peer- to- peer business models by comparing the established hotel chains with the room- sharing site Airbnb. The Intercontinental Hotel chain, for example, has been around for 65 years and has an inventory of 650,000 hotel rooms, of which they own 100 percent. In contrast, Airbnb has been around for eight years and has an inventory of 1.5 million listings, of which it owns none. This means that Airbnb has unlocked latent assets comparable to 65 years of cumulative investment within the corporate world, and it has done so with essentially no capital outlay beyond the cost of the platform itself.

Participants in peer- to- peer marketplaces are clearly drawn by the ease of search and low transaction costs. Simply put, buyers pay less than they would without the service and sellers earn more— if only because they often would not be able to bring their service to market without the peer- to- peer platform.15 Furthermore, buyers have access to options previously unavailable in the marketplace, while sellers have opportunities to diversify their sources of income and increase their fi-nancial resilience.

177



Education 177

Of course, new business models that gain market acceptance almost invariably invite challenges from incumbents. New peer- to- peer busi-nesses are no exception. Wherever peer- to- peer platforms have gained traction across the country, regulatory challenges have followed. Invoking regulatory equity, for example, licensed taxicab drivers have led challenges to the legality of Uber’s business model in city after city. Invoking consumer and production safety, hotel and restaurant owners, respectively, have sought to slow the growth of room- sharing services like Airbnb and the proliferation of food trucks in urban areas (which has been accelerated by ratings platforms such as Yelp).

But there is more to the peer- to- peer economy than pushback from threatened incumbents. The deeper trend has to do with the return to an earlier model of personal productive activity— creating directly for other people. “This is not the familiar question of whether our machines will put us all out of work,” writes technology inves-tor Esther Dyson about the rise of the peer- to- peer economy. “The question is whether we will start doing more and more intellectual work for free or for barter, becoming more like our ancestors. Instead of producing food or housing for ourselves or for barter, we will be producing content and amusement for one another, without engag-ing in explicit (taxable) financial exchange.”16 Consider Wikipedia, an educational resource comprising over 40 million webpages, writ-ten in 292 languages, and used by more than 370 million people per month globally. The paid staff involved in the maintenance of this resource number two hundred, of whom only 40 are involved in the editorial aspects of the work. These 40 are not engaged directly in creating content but rather are focused on supporting a community of more than 70,000 “Wikipedians”— the volunteers who write and edit Wikipedia’s articles.

Where both the classical and neoclassical schools in economics have, for over two centuries, focused on material scarcity and the desire for happiness through consumption, the actual economy is increasingly driven by algorithmic abundance and the desire for happiness through production.17

The Game of life and the permanent income hypothesis present some reflexive notions on how to respond to the differential outcomes

178



178 The Human Advantage

between college graduates and those without a college degree, to which I just alluded, and to associated societal challenges such as the explo-sion of student debt, the aging population, and the crisis facing Social Security and other so- called entitlement programs:

• Bad outcomes for people without college degrees implies a need to

increase the number of college graduates.

• An excess of student debt implies the need to increase the supply of

subsidized student loans.

• Too little stability in the labor market implies the need to protect

jobs and slow the automation of work.

• An aging population with inadequate aggregate saving implies the

need to improve health insurance and expand economic supports to

people over 65.

A significant share of government spending in the United States and in other advanced industrialized countries is allocated in a manner con-sistent with these premises. They are as widely believed as they are in-creasingly obsolete.

Changes in the world of work are undermining the premises on which these decades- old policy notions are based. Formal education does not ensure economic security in the way that it did in recent gen-erations. Increasingly, life expectancy is challenging the norm of re-tirement at age sixty- five. And large asset- owning corporations that previously earned persistent profits and offered steady employment are increasingly being challenged by peer- to- peer platforms like Airbnb and market- enabling platforms like Uber, transforming labor markets in the process.

Of course, these companies represent just the beginning of the disruption in the world of work that will occur as a consequence of the latest phase in the advance of code. The peer- to- peer busi-ness models in local transportation, hospitality, food service, and the rental of consumer goods were the first to emerge, not because they are the most important for the economy but because these are in-dustries with relatively low regulatory complexity. In contrast, there has been relatively little peer- to- peer business innovation in health-care, energy, and education— three industries that together comprise

179



Education 179

more than a quarter of the U.S. GDP— where regulatory complexity is relatively high.

What will happen to the world of work when these industries become monopolized by a few dominant platforms the way Uber has come to dominate urban transportation?

That is the topic of the next chapter.



Q 12



Equity

Progress and Poverty



The great fact that poverty and all its concomitants show themselves in communities just as they develop into the conditions toward which mate-rial progress tends— proves that the social difficulties existing wherever a certain stage of progress has been reached, do not arise from local circum-stances, but are, in some way or another, engendered by progress itself.

— Henry George, Progress and Poverty, 1879



On page 56 of volume 2, number 2, of The Single Tax Review, pub-lished in autumn 1902, an item of some enduring interest appears. The item reads, “Miss Lizzie J. Magie, a single taxer of Washington, D.C., has invented an ingenious game, played with checkers and dice as in Parcheesi, and thus describes it for the Review: ‘It is a practical demon-stration of the present system of land- grabbing, with all its usual out-comes and consequences. It might as well have been called ‘The Game of Life,’ as it contains all the elements of success and failure in the real world, and the object is the same as the human race in general seems to have, i.e., the accumulation of wealth.’ ” Magie goes on to describe the rules of her game: “Representative money, deeds, mortgages, notes and charters are used in the game; lots are bought and sold; rents are collected … The railroad is also represented, and those who make use of it are obliged to pay their fare … There are two franchises: water and lighting … There are two tracts of land on the board that are held out of use— are neither for rent or for sale— and on each of these appear the forbidding sign: ‘No trespassing. Go to Jail’ ” (see figure 12.1).

180

181



Equity 181





FIGURE 12.1 The Landlord’s Game.

Magie called her game The Landlord’s Game, since her original in-tention was “simply to work out a demonstration of how the land-lord gets his money and keeps it.” She published her description of The Landlord’s Game in The Single Tax Review because the game was intended to advance the ideas of Henry George, the newspaper editor turned economist whose work I introduced in chapter five.

Magie was particularly enthused about the game’s pedagogical value for children. “Children of nine or ten years and who possess average intelligence can easily understand the game and they get a good deal of hearty enjoyment out of it,” she reported. “They learn that the quickest way to accumulate wealth and gain power is to get all the land they can get in the best localities and hold on to it.” She notes that this lesson is

182



182 The Human Advantage

not without its risks: “There are those who argue that it may be a dan-gerous thing to teach children how they may get the advantage of their fellows, but let me tell you there are no fairer- minded beings in the world than our own little American children. Watch them in their play and see how quick they are, should any one of their number attempt to cheat or take undue advantage of another, to cry, ‘No fair!’ ” Magie was confident that the more children were exposed to the game, the more effectively Henry George’s “Single Tax” movement would be advanced. “Let the children once see clearly the gross injustice of our present land system and when they grow up, if they are allowed to develop naturally, the evil will soon be remedied.”

Yet as early as 1902, two years before she received a patent on The Landlord’s Game, Magie saw that it was a game “of amusement as well as instruction, and one which has attractions for both young and old.” Decades later, Charles Darrow, a domestic heater salesman from Germantown, Pennsylvania, created a variant of The Landlord’s Game based on street names in Atlantic City, New Jersey. While the funda-mentals of Darrow’s version of the game were essentially the same as Magie’s, the intent was reversed: rather than caution impressionable youth against land- grabbing through a direct experience of its inequita-ble consequences, Darrow’s version encouraged land- grabbing through a direct experience of its unique thrills.

So it was that Monopoly came into existence. For 80 years, fans of the game have been unwittingly taking a tutorial on “the gross injustice of our present land system.”

In an 1887 essay titled “The Absence of Design in Nature: The Prodigality of Nature and the Niggardliness of Man,” American nature writer Richard Jefferies described the propensity of living things to re-produce themselves at exponential rates. “There is no enough in nature,” he writes. “It is one vast prodigality. It is a feast. There is no economy, no saving; no penury; a golden shower of good things forever descend-ing … Contrast this with the material economy of our world, in which each individual is compelled, in order to exist, to labor, to save and to compete with other people for control and possession of scarce re-sources. This is the iron law of economics in our world: the superabun-dance of nature and the utter niggardliness of man.’ ”

183



Equity 183

Envisioning a similar future in which abundance displaces scarcity while also stressing the advance of code as a central driving factor, Marc Andreessen recently offered the following on Twitter: “Posit a world in which all material needs are provided free, by robots and material syn-thesizers. Imagine six, or 10, billion people doing nothing but arts and sciences, culture and exploring and learning … Technological progress is precisely what makes a strong, rigorous social safety net affordable.”

Andreessen has good company in articulating such a view. John Stuart Mill predicted two centuries ago that human society ultimately would reach a stage in which a population that is no longer increas-ing earns high (relative) incomes and has a steadily improving state of well- being, all sustained by continued investment in what I have called the advance of code. John Maynard Keynes offered a similar vision in a 1930 essay titled “Economic Possibilities for our Grandchildren,” in which he predicted that humanity was on a trajectory to solve the problem of economic scarcity within a matter of decades. Humanity’s problem thereafter, according to Keynes, would be to solve the problem of leisure time, noting that “it is fearful for the ordinary person, with no special talents, to occupy himself, if he no longer has roots in the soil or in custom or in the beloved conventions of a traditional society.”1 In such a world, the promise of meaningful occupation ultimately would come to be valued above wealth.

Not everyone accepts this vision, of course (see Text Box 12.1). Among the first to see its flaws was Henry George, the economist whose ideas inspired the creation of Monopoly. Why was the land system unjust, ac-cording to George? And what relevance do George’s views on injustice have to the code economy?

Much like his English contemporary Richard Jefferies, George saw man’s natural state as being one of abundance rather than scarcity. “The present century has been marked by a prodigious increase in wealth- producing power,” he wrote in Progress and Poverty. “The utilization of steam and electricity, the introduction of improved processes and labor- saving machinery, the greater subdivision and grander scale of production, the wonderful facilitation of exchanges, have multiplied enormously the effectiveness of labor. At the beginning of this marvel-ous era it was natural to expect, and it was expected, that labor- saving inventions would lighten the toil and improve the condition of the

184



184 The Human Advantage



Text Box 12.1 An End to (Important) Innovation?

At a retreat hosted by the Kauffman Foundation that I attended a

year ago, Robert Gordon, a noted macroeconomist at Northwestern

University, opened his talk with the following comment: “Bob Solow

in 1957 taught us that the best way to talk about the importance

of innovation is to examine the history of Total Factor Productivity

(TFP). [Based on analysis of TFP data] I’m going to argue that the

most important innovations happened a hundred years ago.”

The facts as reported by Gordon are as follow: Measured TFP

growth was high in the postwar era, slowed significantly in the 1970s

and 1980s, and then picked up considerably from the mid- 1990s to

the mid- 2000s. Since 2008, the average rate of productivity growth

has been slower than it has been in a generation. Gordon’s conclu-

sion? “I see stasis everywhere I look.”2

How do we reconcile this perspective with Marc Andreessen’s

claims not only that “software is eating the world” but also that

“technological progress is precisely what makes a strong, rigorous

social safety net affordable”?

It turns out that, as a measure of dividends to society from the

advance of code, TFP has two categories of shortcomings: what it

includes, and what it leaves out. The deficiencies of TFP as a measure

call into question the entire narrative of “stasis” advanced by Gordon

and others.

The calculation of TFP requires measures of aggregate output,

capital, and labor. The measurement of each of these is inherently

difficult, however (see Text Box 12.2). What is more, there is reason

to believe that the inherent challenges involved in measuring output,

capital, and labor are growing over time, rather than shrinking, as a

direct consequence of the advance of code.

Take the Internet. The Internet is a platform that enabled the

sharing of digitally encoded information and the use of digitally

encoded tools. We use the Internet for … well, lots of things. We

pay for some of the resources we access via the Internet, but many

(if not most) we access without payment. What is the value of those

services? By one estimate, for the United States alone, $100 billion.

185



Equity 185



That number will only grow as digital services continue to expand

in dominant sectors of the economy such as education, health, and

even energy. None of that is measured as output, and thus none is

captured in TFP measures.3

This leads to what is arguably the most serious defect of TFP: that

it is constructed from a method that all but excludes the two mar-

ket structures arguably most clearly associated with the advance of

code: open source on one side and monopolistic competition on the

other.4

The actual business of firms in the economy is increasingly about

differentiation— creating goods and services for which close substi-

tutes do not exist. In other words, the point of business is increasingly

about contradicting the assumptions that underlie the measurement

of TFP. Consider just this astonishing fact, noted recently by eco-

nomics blogger Justin Fox:

The S&P 500 are five hundred big public firms listed on US ex-changes. Imagine that you wanted to create a new firm to com-pete with one of these big established firms. So you wanted to duplicate that firm’s products, employees, buildings, machines, land, trucks, etc. You’d hire away some key employees and copy their business process, at least as much as you could see and were legally allowed to copy.

Forty years ago the cost to copy such a firm was about 5/ 6

of the total stock price of that firm. So 1/ 6 of that stock price represented the value of things you couldn’t easily copy, like pat-ents, customer goodwill, employee goodwill, regulator favorit-ism, and hard to see features of company methods and culture. Today it costs only 1/ 6 of the stock price to copy all a firm’s visible items and features that you can legally copy. So today the other 5/ 6 of the stock price represents the value of all those things you can’t copy.

Upon some reflection, we can see how this would be true. How

much of the valuation of the world’s two most highly valued compa-

nies at the moment, Apple and Alphabet, is attributable to the stock

of land, buildings, and office equipment that these companies own?

186



186 The Human Advantage



The answer is: not much. Most of the value is intangible— in the

company’s business processes, proprietary knowledge, and powerful

brand built on the cumulative experience of hundreds of millions of

people using Apple and Google products. In other words, the value

is not in capital, but in code.

Amar Bhidé, present at the same Kauffman Foundation retreat

to which I alluded above, accurately sums up the conclusion: “It is

not that there is a better way of aggregating productivity. There is a

fundamental disconnect between measures of TFP which assume a

monolithic, mechanistic process, that’s fundamentally incompatible

with the widespread exercise of individual imagination and agency.

And there is simply no way around it.”5



laborer; that the enormous increase in the power of producing wealth would make real poverty a thing of the past.”6

To George, the natural outcome of progress is precisely consistent with the bounty of nature: shared prosperity and an end to poverty. Yet at the time George wrote, the actual outcome of progress had been— paradoxically and unnaturally, in his view— a reduction in the well- being of workers and increased inequality: “Where the conditions to which material progress everywhere tends are the most fully realized— that is to say, where population is densest, wealth greatest, and the ma-chinery of production and exchange most highly developed— we find the deepest poverty, the sharpest struggle for existence, and the most enforced idleness.”7 Progress is in fact the cause of poverty, according to George, not its relief.

The reason? Anticipating theories of economic geography that would not gain prominence for another century, George observed that land values are driven fundamentally by the benefits people derive from proximity to other people: “The most valuable lands on the globe [are those] to which a surpassing utility has been given by the increase of population.”8 Given the rate at which land values have increased in major metropolitan areas around the world in the past three decades, this statement seems almost self- evident. However, it contrasted directly with the views of the classical economists who

187



Equity 187

dominated political economics in George’s day. George contin-ued: “The reason why, in spite of the increase of productive power, wages constantly tend to a minimum which will give but a bare living, is that, with increase in productive power, rent tends to even greater increase, thus producing a constant tendency to the forcing down of wages.”9

George uses the terms “natural” and “unnatural” to break down into two components the increase in rent associated with the agglomeration of people and productive power in cities:

We have seen that with material progress, as it is at present going

on, there is a twofold tendency to the advance of rent. Both are to

the increase of the proportion of the wealth produced which goes as

rent, and to the decrease of the proportion which goes as wages and

interest. But the first, or natural tendency, which results from the

laws of social development, is to the increase of rent as a quantity,

without the reduction of wages and interest as quantities, or even

with their quantitative increase. The other tendency, which results

from the unnatural appropriation of land to private ownership, is

to the increase of rent as a quantity by the reduction of wages and

interest as quantities.10

Just as one landlord in Monopoly inevitably ends up with all of the money as a result of positive feedback built into the structure of that toy economy, so do landlords in the real economy, according to George, end up appropriating a vastly disproportionate share of the overall wealth society produces. At the root of this dynamic is the power of cities, noted by Jane Jacobs long ago, to act as a platform for the cre-ation of wealth though the advance of code.

In the United States, concern over inequality of income and wealth began to grow following the 2008 recession, when awareness increased of the longstanding gap between the growth of labor productivity and that of real wages. It intensified in 2014 with the publication of Capital in the Twenty- First Century, the massive, and massively influential, volume by economist Thomas Piketty that detailed trends in income and wealth inequality in advanced industrialized countries.

188



188 The Human Advantage

For all its length and technical complexity, the argument advanced in Piketty’s book can be summarized simply: the natural functioning of markets doesn’t reduce inequality, it creates inequality.

In the 1950s and 1960s, pioneering economist Simon Kuznets— the person most responsible for the development of national income ac-counts and the concept of gross domestic product (GDP)— undertook a thorough analysis of the relationship between economic growth and inequality in the United States. He found that, while inequality had increased as the U.S. economy grew rapidly in the first half of the twen-tieth century, the trend thereafter was reversed and inequality declined. The conjectured “upside- down- U- shaped” relationship between eco-nomic growth and inequality became known as the Kuznets curve. It supported a widespread view that, if government permitted the code- driven advance of the economy to proceed on its own terms, the prob-lem of inequality would eventually be solved.

By undertaking a more comprehensive and current analysis of the type first undertaken by Kuznets, Piketty challenged the idea that eco-nomic growth eventually reduces inequality of income and wealth. Rather than converging toward egalitarianism and meritocracy, the gap between rich and poor in United States and other advanced industrial-ized countries is growing— as Piketty emphasizes, the gap is now ap-proaching levels not seen since the 1920s. Piketty concludes: “Economic growth is quite simply incapable of satisfying this democratic and meri-tocratic hope [as conveyed by the Kuznets curve], but must create spe-cific institutions for the purpose and not rely solely on market forces or technological progress.”11 To ensure that the advance of code does not lead to an increasingly inegalitarian society, Piketty asserts, government action is needed.

The trend of growing inequality in the United States over the past century as computed by Piketty and his coauthors is conveyed in figure 12.2, which indicates that, after diminishing sharply from the 1950s to the 1980s— the endpoint for the analyses undertaken by Kuznets— wealth inequality is back to levels not seen since the Gilded Age.12

A more careful look at the data presented in Capital in the Twenty- First Century reveals, however, that when considered in the sense of the productive assets of society— which, as I have argued throughout this book, overwhelmingly consist of code— “capital” as referred to in this

189



Equity 189

Top 0.1% wealth share in the United States, 1913–2012

25%

20%

15%

10%

% of total household wealth

5%

0%

1913 1918 1923 1928 1933 1938 1943 1948 1953 1958 1963 1968 1973 1978 1983 1988 1993 1998 2003 2008 2013

This figure depicts the share of total household wealth held by the 0.1% richest families, as estimated by capitalizing income tax

returns in 2012, the top 0.1% includes about 160,000 families with net wealth above $20.6 million.

FIGURE 12.2 Top 0.1% Wealth Share in the United States, 1913– 2012. The figure plots wealth share owned by the top .1% richest families in the U.S. from 1913 to 2012. Wealth is total assets (including real estate and funded pension wealth) net of all debts. Wealth excludes the present value of future government transfers (such as Social Security or Medicare benefits).

Source: Saez, Emmanuel and Gabriel Zucman (2014). “Wealth Inequality in the United States since 1913: Evidence from Capitalized Income Tax Data”, CEPR Discussion Paper 10227, October.

book is not really capital at all (see Text Box 12.2).13 “Capital” as defined by Piketty is really just tradable wealth: stocks, bonds, jewelry, cash, and, very importantly, as we’ll see now, real estate.

The much discussed increase in inequality since the 1970s that Piketty documents is primarily about one thing: the increasing value of real estate, an asset that is disproportionately held by the wealthy. Indeed, the most important lesson in Piketty’s book is conveyed to us in a much more accessible form in Lizzie Magie’s description in The Single Tax Review “of how the landlord gets his money and keeps it” in the game of Monopoly. Magie observed that “the quickest way to accumu-late wealth and gain power is to get all the land they can get in the best localities and hold on to it.” This simple observation sums up the core of the empirical content of Capital in the Twenty- First Century.

Referring to David Ricardo but sounding more like Henry George in the following passage, Piketty acknowledges the trend in real

190



190 The Human Advantage



Text Box 12.2 The Cambridge Capital Controversy

Just what is “capital”? More specifically, to what are economists actu-

ally referring when they employ the word “capital” in an aggregate

sense, as does Piketty in Capital in the Twenty- First Century? To be

sure, a plow is a plow, a loom is a loom, and an assembly line is

an assembly line. We can without great difficulty sum all the plows

used in an economy. But how does one compute the sum of a plow,

a loom, and an assembly line? By their weight? Certainly that is

not a good economic measure. By their cost? The productivity they

enable? If the latter, how do we compare the different types of out-

puts machines produce? And how does one account for computers,

much less code?

This turns out to be a difficult problem to solve. Indeed, long-

standing debate exists over the use of both aggregate capital and

aggregate production functions into which such capital measures are

an input (see Text Box 5.2 on the Cobb- Douglas production func-

tion). The debate began when famed Cambridge University econo-

mist Joan Robinson wrote the following in 1953:

The production function has been a powerful instrument of miseducation. The student of economic theory is taught to write Q = F (L, K ) where L is a quantity of labor, K a quan-tity of capital and Q a rate of output of commodities. He is instructed to assume all workers are alike, and to measure L in man- hours of labor … and then he is hurried on to the next question, in the hope that he will forget to ask in what units K is measured. Before he ever does ask, he has become a profes-sor, and so sloppy habits of thought are handed on from one generation to the next.14

With this paragraph as an opening salvo, Robinson set off a debate

over the nature of capital that engaged leading economists for over a

decade. Because the protagonists were concentrated in Cambridge,

Massachusetts, and Cambridge, UK, it was dubbed the Cambridge

Capital Controversy.

191



Equity 191



For a dozen years, from 1954 to 1966, claims and counterclaims

regarding the conceptual coherence of “aggregate capital” flew back

and forth across the Atlantic, encased within the bindings of the

top economics journals. In addition to the fiery and charismatic

Robinson, the protagonists from Cambridge, UK, included Piero

Sraffa, a uniquely inventive scholar whose work on “the production

of commodities by means of commodities”— while barely remem-

bered and rarely taught— is increasingly relevant in today’s algo-

rithmic world. The protagonists from Cambridge, Massachusetts,

included Paul Samuelson, one of the primary architects of neoclassi-

cal theory, the author of the world’s bestselling economics textbook,

and the recipient of the Nobel Prize in Economics in 1970. They also

included Robert Solow.

Solow understood full well the difficulties inherent in measur-

ing aggregate capital. In his 1957 paper, “Technical Change and the

Aggregate Production Function,” Solow stated that measuring aggre-

gate capital was a task that “will really drive a purist mad.” Referring

to a correction he made to the data to account for the fact that the

rates of capital utilization vary over time, he states, “This is undoubt-

edly wrong, but probably gets closer to the truth than making no

correction at all.”15 Here and throughout the debate, Solow’s defense

of aggregate capital rests on pragmatic grounds, rather than theoreti-

cal ones. Elsewhere he quips, “If God had meant there to be more

than two factors of production, he would have made it easier for us

to draw three- dimensional diagrams.”16

How did the two future Nobel Laureates from Cambridge,

Massachusetts, fare in this debate against Robinson and her icono-

clastic cohorts from Cambridge, UK? On the technical case, they

actually lost— and rather badly. With characteristic intellectual integ-

rity and graciousness, Samuelson offered this concession in a 1966

essay simply titled, “A Summing Up”: “The conventional neoclassical

version … is spelled out at length in my Economics. Unfortunately,

until the [technical issues relating to the capital controversy] had

alerted me to the complexity of the process, I had not realized that

the conventional account represents only one of two possible out-

comes.”17 Renowned general equilibrium theorist Frank Hahn was

192



192 The Human Advantage



more direct, writing in 1972 that aggregate production functions

“cannot be shown to follow from [general equilibrium] theory and in

general [are] therefore open to severe logical objections.”18

The debate revealed that “aggregate capital” is a coherent concept

only under restrictive assumptions about the nature of production

and technology. Yet that outcome did not prevent the formulation

“Output = F(Labor, Capital)” in general, and the Cobb- Douglas pro-

duction function in particular, from becoming the dominant frame-

works for understanding and representing production in economics.

Why? While the English Cantabrigians offered a potent critique of

neoclassical production theory, they failed to offer something even

more powerful: an alternative. Yes, as Solow clearly acknowledged in

the 1957 paper, aggregate capital was almost impossible to measure

with any accuracy. But some measure of aggregate capital— however

imperfect— was essential to advancing work in empirical macroeco-

nomics. And the world at large demanded answers to macroeco-

nomic questions, not objections to the theoretical foundations on

which such answers were based, however legitimate those objections

might be.



estate values, and thus land rents, and alludes to their destabilizing impact: “Once both population and output begin to grow steadily, land tends to become increasingly scarce relative to other goods. The law of supply and demand then implies that the price of land will rise continu-ously, as will the rents paid to landlords. The landlords will therefore claim a growing share of national income, as the share available to the rest of the population decreases, thus upsetting the social equilibrium.”19

Economic geography has taught us that the “best localities” will be the places where the returns to density are greatest— which is consistent with Henry George’s assertion, backed by the Santa Fe team data that I discussed in chapter one, and completely contrary to the arguments of the Reverend Thomas Malthus and other classical economists. Land in “the best localities” increases in value because cities offer people tan-gible economic returns that derive from density and interconnection. The mechanism by which cities deliver on this promise is to convert

193



Equity 193

code into infrastructure. The catch- 22 is that cities’ very success in gen-erating concentrated abundance creates a new form of scarcity: proxim-ity to that abundance.

In 2015, based on similar logic, former U.S. Office of Management and Budget head Peter Orszag stated in a column for Bloomberg View that, “in the lasting debate over Thomas Piketty’s book on outsized returns on capital, a significant fact has been obscured: If you exclude land and housing, capital has not risen as a share of the U.S. econ-omy.” Orszag goes on to offer data that validate Henry George’s conjec-ture: “Capital excluding land and housing has been roughly constant as a share of the economy since the mid- 1950s, and is lower today than at the turn of the 20th century. What has skyrocketed over the past several decades is the value of land and housing.” He concludes with an endorsement of a land tax of the variety backed by Lizzie Magie and her fellow Single Taxers: “Sometimes old ideas are good ideas. Henry George advocated forcefully for a land tax in his 1879 book, Progress and Poverty. More than 135 years later, perhaps its time is ripe.”20

In chapter five I quoted the quip, “Buy land, they’re not making it anymore.” The value of land and housing has indeed grown dra-matically in recent decades, but the reason is not because increasingly marginal lands have come under agricultural cultivation, as foreseen by classical economists. The growth has instead been due to increasing returns to density, as Henry George predicted. Cities continue to be humanity’s greatest invention, but their very success as platforms for enabling the creation and sharing of code has increased the financial divide between those who own land and those who do not.

“geography constrains everything humans do,” wrote Cory Ondrejka in 2007 in the journal Innovations, which I founded and coedit with GrameenPhone founder Iqbal Quadir. “From our amazing abilities to navigate and model 3- dimensional space to the locations of multinational corporations’ headquarters, physical and social evolution have been firmly shaped by geographic constraints. At the personal level, it impacts how we build memories, communicate, and collaborate. At the cultural level, geography defines how and where cities are built, im-pacts rates of technological development, and has been the cause for innumerable wars. Geography is an inescapable feature of all our lives.”21

194



194 The Human Advantage

Ondrejka was writing with a unique perspective on geography: for the previous seven years he had been the chief technology officer for Linden Lab, which created Second Life, the first large- scale virtual world. Ondrejka’s essay appeared at the peak of the platform’s popu-larity, when Second Life had nearly seven million registered users and 50,000 human- driven “avatars” were interacting with one another on the platform at any given time. Second Life sustained an economy con-sisting of the production and exchange of virtual goods and services; it had a GDP equivalent to $500 million, benchmarked by $6 million per month of monetized trade with the real world.

Second Life was, and is, a platform on which people share experiences. Unlike games like World of Warcraft and The Sims, the entire Second Life experience is user created. “There is no manufactured conflict, no set objective [in Second Life],” Catherine Smith, Linden Lab’s spokesper-son, was quoted as saying around the time Ondrejka’s essay appeared. “It’s an entirely open- ended experience.”22 Ondrejka commented fur-ther: “Creation within Second Life is accomplished through the use of atomistic creation, an approach granting residents both great freedom to explore design space and an interface allowing multiple builders to create together, much as multiple construction workers collaborate si-multaneously when building a home. In atomistic construction, simple geometric primitives are combined in a multitude of ways to build ex-tremely complex creations and behaviors.”23

Although launched before Facebook, Twitter, and World of Warcraft were created, and still in existence, Second Life never achieved a frac-tion of the participation of those better- known platforms. The inter-face for creating content in the game— a mouse and keyboard, as envi-sioned by Douglas Engelbart in his “Mother of all Demos”— ultimately proved too difficult for many people to master; in the words of the game’s founder, it was “like learning to play the violin or something. I thought, ‘We’ll just figure out how to use a mouse to do this all.’ But it was too hard.”24

Yet, as Ondrejka communicated in his Innovations essay, Second Life represented something far more significant than was indicated by its number of users: it offered a fully digital community that sig-naled a fundamental shift in the nature of organizations and even governance.

195



Equity 195

Electric cars provide an analogy. The General Motors EV- 1, the first all- electric car designed for mass production, was an early and famous failure. Nevertheless, it set the stage for later all- electric vehicles that have gradually shifted buyers’ preferences and behaviors— the Tesla, the Chevy Volt, and the Nissan Leaf. The once- unimaginable shift away from internal combustion engines to electric vehicles is now only one small dimension of the more fundamental transformation of the trans-portation infrastructure that is clearly underway, with “parking assist” and other automated features signaling the arrival of driverless vehicles in the immediate future. Driverless vehicles will in turn interact with real- time spatial databases evolved from applications like Google Maps, which will navigate “real” three- dimensional space based on a code- based representation of geographical space that is located in cyberspace. In this way, virtual and real driving will converge.

The virtual and real worlds of entrepreneurship and work are con-verging in similar ways. In the pioneer world that was Second Life, as described by Ondrejka in 2007, Linden Lab implemented a change to the terms of service that dramatically lowered the cost of creating vir-tual goods and services and made it easier for users to collaborate: “As soon as tens or hundreds of U.S. dollars were sufficient to start a busi-ness in Second Life, thousands of people began to try. Compare this to the real world, where a primary source of funding for small businesses is a second mortgage … These communities are all creating within a zero marginal cost environment, quite literally a post- scarcity economy. Although there are limits on the density of creation within Second Life, for the most part the only scarce resource is time, thus Second Life is a very pure example of an attention economy.”25

Seven years later— a century in Internet time— The Economist pub-lished an article about entrepreneurial startups in the United States titled “The Cambrian Explosion,” the title referring to the relatively brief interval about 540 million years ago during which most of the major animal phyla appeared. The article described how an array of new platforms had dramatically lowered the cost of launching and growing a real- world business: “One explanation for the Cambrian ex-plosion of 540m years ago is that at that time the basic building blocks of life had just been perfected, allowing more complex organisms to be assembled more rapidly. Similarly, the basic building blocks for digital

196



196 The Human Advantage

services and products— the ‘technologies of startup production,’ in the words of Josh Lerner of Harvard Business School— have become so evolved, cheap and ubiquitous that they can be easily combined and recombined.”26 The result is an environment that is a convergence of the virtual and real worlds.

What are these building blocks? “Some of these building blocks are snippets of code that can be copied free from the internet, along with easy- to- learn programming frameworks (such as Ruby on Rails),” Ondrejka explained. “Others are ‘application programming inter-faces’ (APIs)” that are automated programs that allow one computer to communicate and share with another computer— enabling a car to draw traffic data easily from the Internet. There are the infrastructure platforms, “services that can host startups’ offerings (Amazon’s cloud computing), distribute them (Apple’s App Store) and market them (Facebook, Twitter).” And, at the base of it all, “there is the Internet, the mother of all platforms, which is now fast, universal and wireless.”27

As Ondrejka noted in his 2007 essay, the convergence of virtual and real platforms will extend to every dimension of work life and will have profound implications for governance and the organization of human society. “Virtual worlds will change the alignment of labor markets and the shapes of large organizations, including nation- states,” Ondrejka wrote. “Changing the substrate for innovation necessitates rethink-ing common ideas about what constitutes a working group. When less connected individuals can still work together effectively, new pos-sibilities exist for more focused and efficient collaboration requiring lower time commitments than conventional jobs. When a person is able to join multiple organizations, each only requiring a few hours per month, labor markets will adapt to utilize this transformation.”28

Considering Ondrejka’s observations in the context of Henry George’s theories and Thomas Piketty’s empirical findings, we are prompted to ask the following: If cities have been man’s greatest invention, serving as platforms for the creation and evolution of code, what will happen as we create new digital cities— cities located not on land but in “the cloud” of cyberspace? How will the advent of these new platforms affect work, governance, prosperity, and equity? And what will all of this mean for us all as we seek to make our way through this new, rapidly changing world— to play The Game of Life according to ever- changing rules?

197



Equity 197

Code isn’t only about advancing technology. It’s also about expand-ing geography.

if our era has a Henry George, it is not Thomas Piketty but Jaron Lanier. Like Vint Cerf, Lanier is an Internet pioneer (although of a more recent generation). He coined the term “virtual reality” and founded the first company to produce virtual reality goggles and gloves. In physical appearance, however, Lanier is Cerf’s opposite. Cerf is lean, bald, wears three- piece suits, and drives a vintage Jaguar bearing the license plate “Cerf’s Up.” Lanier is corpulent, sports Medusa- esque dreadlocks, and, as a matter of sartorial principle, takes “low- key” to its black- T- shirt- and- jeans extreme. Yet Cerf and Lanier share many intel-lectual traits— extreme intelligence being the most obvious, but also a ready wit and a deep understanding of the social context within which code originates and evolves.

If Cerf’s primary concern about the societal impact the advance of code will have is employment, then Lanier’s is ownership. Like Cerf, Lanier has no doubt that the digital revolution will generate enormous value for society. The question is, how will that value be distributed?

Speaking about his book Who Owns the Future? at a 2013 Santa Fe Institute symposium on Big Data in which I participated, Lanier began by emphasizing that the machine- learning algorithms that dominate the field of artificial intelligence today— which simultaneously enhance human capabilities and displace human workers— are themselves just the aggregation of human intelligence. “Big data has to be under-stood as repackaging of human labor. It’s not stand- alone automation, it’s human- driven automation,” Lanier reminded his audience. “The people are still valuable, they’re just invisible.”29

And yet, while a large number of people contribute to the value Big Data creates, a relatively small number captures most of the gains. Why is this?

The reason is the same as what Henry George discovered with regard to cities. The value people derive from living and working in cities itself derives directly from their proximity to others, and to the role cities play as platforms for the creation and evolution of code, which is also related to that proximity. In this sense, large numbers of people con-tribute to creating value in cities. However, over at least the past three

198



198 The Human Advantage

decades, the financial rewards of the growth and development of cities have accrued disproportionately to one subset of the people associated with cities: the owners of real estate. Value creation is broadly based, while wealth accumulation is narrowly concentrated.

The same is true of digital platforms. Many people create value on these platforms, but the financial rewards of their growth and devel-opment have accrued disproportionately to one specific subset of the people associated with them: their owners.30 Furthermore, in a manner analogous to the Santa Fe team’s findings regarding the growth of cities, platforms have a “winner- take- all” quality to them, in that past success feeds future growth. This “positive feedback” that is common to cities and technology platforms concentrates the returns from value creation on both of these types of platforms.

Lanier reminds us that, as the boundaries between virtual worlds and the real world blur and shift, the definition of land and the meaning of monopoly are blurring and shifting as well. Digital platforms are the new land; will they also be the new Monopoly?

The answer depends largely on the evolution of a particularly im-portant dimension of the advance of code: protocols for authentica-tion and verification. Why? Physical land is yours if, and only if, you have both the right and the practical capacity to prevent other people from accessing it.31 The same is true of digital land. The value of the moment of attention owned by a Facebook post or of the proprietary data and analytic resources owned by Google depends on the ability of Facebook to prevent others from using that space or of Google to prevent others from accessing their proprietary data and analytic resources. That capacity for exclusion— the source of all monetized value derived from digital exchange— depends on the existence of re-liable protocols for authentication and verification. As Internet guru Tim O’Reilly has put it, “Open leads to value creation, it doesn’t lead to value capture. To capture value you have to find something to close.”32

The nineteenth- and twentieth- century economies evolved a set of systems for managing authentication verification that were all based to some extent on the same ancient concept: branding. A dollar bill is a branded piece of paper. A Mercedes- Benz is a branded assemblage of steel, plastic, and rubber. A Harvard graduate is a branded human

199



Equity 199

being. Brands are the attempted institutionalization of a quality more fundamental than money and more enduring than markets: authentic-ity. Brands aggregate trust and in so doing mine value. Brands are the primary way human beings navigate complexity in today’s advanced in-dustrialized economy. They offer the promise of differentiating between what is “the real thing” and what isn’t.

The value of brands is a direct reflection of the anonymity of the world that the advance of code has enabled over the past two cen-turies. In the village, the very concept of the “brand” is superfluous. Reputations are personal. Experience is immediate. Monitoring is direct. Memory is human. In the village, chieftains can be made, rights can be defined, witches can be burned, and shamans can be worshiped, without the need for any third- party intermediation. Not so in the city— which, as I have argued throughout this book, is the ultimate ex-pression of and vehicle for the advance of code. Because cities are big, interactions among people in them are largely anonymous. People in cities reduce that anonymity to some degree through the evolution of laws, cultural conventions, and neighborhoods. What can’t be managed through those mechanisms, the city manages through brands.

If you doubt the importance of brands, consider the penalties we impose on those who violate the boundaries of this most fundamental form of property. The never- ending battle of the State against currency counterfeiters is a good example. Recall that Isaac Newton, among the greatest geniuses in human history, spent a full 20 years of his life as Master of the Royal Mint in England, the prosecution of counterfeit-ers among his primary preoccupations. The U.S. Secret Service, now primarily known as the branch of government responsible for protect-ing the president, began as America’s first federal police force, with the arrest and prosecution of counterfeiters its sole initial mandate. In eighteenth- century England and nineteenth- century United States, as in most other countries for as long as kings and nation- states have issued currency, counterfeiting was considered a form of treason, pun-ishable by death.

The sanctions that accompany brand transgressions today are less severe but are nonetheless among the harshest we impose for social offenses. We routinely compel prominent people— from captains of industry to four- star generals— to leave privileged positions in shame

200



200 The Human Advantage

for the offense of misrepresenting educational credentials, regardless of how little their alleged educational pedigree related to their later accom-plishments. Product counterfeiters who produce copies of luxury goods that are sold at a fraction of the price of branded originals are labeled “pirates,” and we legally pursue them as such: in the United States, individuals and companies that violate the Trademark Counterfeiting Act of 1984 are subject to fines of up to $5 million and prison sentences of up to 20 years.33

Yet just as the advance of code has created brands, code is now in the process of undoing them. How? By converting trust directly into code— into algorithmic systems of verification and authentication. Such systems have the power to hire people to do work, to cure the ill, to feed the hungry, to launch wars, and bring peace. They are doing so already.

The accelerated automation of trust has the potential to create abundant benefits for society but it also brings— as always with the advance of code— commensurate risks. Those risks come down to the integrity of systems of verification and authentication. Any system of trust that can be breached can also be controlled. If I can represent myself as the general of your army, I am the army. If I can represent myself as the administrator of your system, I am your system. I have assumed control … that is, until my own system is breached. This is the essence of the challenge of cyber- security, which is the newest ver-sion of a code- based category of human endeavor that has existed for millennia at the core of social organization.

“It has been said that ‘he who enrolls, controls,’ ” observes, John Clippinger, a pioneer in natural language processing, the founder of four software companies, and the founder of The Law Lab at the Berkman Center for Internet & Society at Harvard University. “Any ‘authoritative’ party that defines and selectively confers ‘credentials’ to access valued resources, privileges and rights— e.g., a bank, state, reli-gious body or social website— exercises enormous power, often with little democratic oversight.”34 To “enroll” users on a digital platform is exactly like issuing an ID card or validating a property claim in the physical world. It is a position of inherent power.

Indeed, a significant fraction of the institutions that dominate modern society— central banks and other large financial institutions,

201



Equity 201

universities, credit bureaus, and land- titling services among them— exist in their current form due to the need for third- party authentica-tion and validation in an anonymous, complex world. The advance of code along this important frontier will determine not only how such institutions will evolve in the twenty- first century, but also the extent to which emerging digital platforms turn out to be nothing more than the new Monopoly— or develop into something more.





Authenticity




Q 13

Creating the Foundation for Reputation



It’s the real thing.

— Coca- Cola advertisement



Over the span of four days during the 2014 South by Southwest (SXSW) festival in Austin, Texas, a food truck manned by chefs from New York’s Institute of Culinary Education (ICE) offered an eclectic mix of dishes: Vietnamese Apple Kebab, Caribbean Snapper Fish & Chips, Belgian Bacon Pudding, an Austrian Chocolate Burrito that fea-tured lean ground beef and two ounces of dark chocolate, and, on the last day, Peruvian Potato Poutine. Aside from novelty, what these dishes had in common is that they all were created by a computer: IBM’s Watson supercomputer, to be precise.

Nicolas Vanderveken, a Canadian digital strategist, organized a social media campaign to get poutine, a French fry and bean curd favorite of his native Quebec, on the menu for the SXSW Watson food truck. “I wanted to see how the system would work with a dish you’ve prob-ably never heard of,” said Vanderveken. Chef James Biscione responded before serving the Watson- created version, “I’m really nervous about this. I know that you’ve got some strong opinions about what poutine is, and that it is something near and dear to your heart, so I hope you’re going to like what we’ve come up with here.”1

IBM calls its food truck project Cognitive Cooking. The point of the experiment is to find out if computers can be creative. “The problem with making creative computers in the past was that computers could

202

203



Authenticity 203

do novel things but there was no way to know if they were any good,” observes Florian Pinel, the chef and IBM data scientist who leads the Cognitive Cooking project. “We chose cooking because this is some-thing that everyone can refer to. The difference is that we have access to a lot of data and using Big Data we can predict the quality of the recipes. The computer can create something that tastes good, and it knows why it tastes good.”2

How does Watson manage this? Employing machine- learning algo-rithms of the type I described in chapter six, it identifies ingredients that will combine well by mining large datasets. “The system doesn’t look at ingredients the same way that chefs do,” Pinel explains. “When a chef looks at an ingredient he thinks of the history of the ingredient and recipes where it’s been used. The system does a little bit of the same, of course, but it also looks at the chemical composition of that ingredi-ent. To understand why they go together, you have to look further at the compounds that are found in these ingredients.”3

Steve Abrams, director of IBM Watson Life, of which Cognitive Cooking is a part, elaborates: “What you see is a system that was trained on 35,000 different recipes, as if it was digesting a giant cook-book. From reading that cookbook it has learned an awful lot about different cuisines and the ingredients that are often used in different cuisines, ingredients that are often paired together, and what it takes to make a particular dish— what it takes to make a burrito different from soup, or Japanese cuisine different from Tex- Mex.”4 To get to the combination of ingredients that resulted in Peruvian Potato Poutine and the other dishes served at SXSW, Watson tested more than a quin-tillion possible combinations. However, refining the most promising combinations and the template recipes produced by Watson into those actually used to prepare the dishes at the festival required the human talent of the highly trained ICE chefs.5 This is the essence of cognitive computing: algorithmic support for human decision- making, and even human creativity.

Summarizing two centuries of the advance of code, from Jacquard- inspired punch- card (or “tabulated”) machines to human- machine sys-tems like the Watson Food Truck, including more than a century of IBM’s own history, Abrams states, “Originally we had tabulated ma-chines, then we went on to programmable systems, now we’re in the era

204



204 The Human Advantage

of cognitive systems.” As I have emphasized throughout this book, the advance of code summarized by Abrams spans almost every domain of human creative activity.

As a further example, consider the fate of two films that premiered on the same night at the 2015 Sundance Film Festival, as recounted by Tim Wu of The New Yorker in a January 2015 article. One of these films, What Happened, Miss Simone? was a documentary about singer and civil rights icon Nina Simone. That film was funded by Netflix, whose corporate decision to back the film was based in part on insights algorithmically gleaned from the vast trove of data it has collected on users of its stream-ing video and movie rental services. The second film was a comedy titled The Bronze, which featured television star Melissa Rauch as a vulgar gymnast. The Bronze was produced by Duplass Brothers Productions and privately financed by “a few wealthy individuals” whose decision to back the film was presumably not based on complex impersonal al-gorithms but rather, as has been the Hollywood norm, on business in-tuition. At the Sundance screening of The Bronze, the festival’s director, John Cooper, indicated that it was a personal selection of his.

You can, of course, guess the outcome. “While not a formal competi-tion in any sense,” Wu recounts, “the night seemed to be a clear victory for algorithms over instincts. ‘Miss Simone’ gained a standing ovation at its screening and has earned critical respect. ‘The Bronze,’ while gar-nering some laughs, currently sits at ten per cent on Rotten Tomatoes, where critics have called it ‘a grueling experience to sit through’ and ‘a mean- spirited and largely witless satire.’ ”

Granted, the use of data and even algorithms to inform film and television programming decisions is nothing new. Television execu-tives for decades have had their decisions guided by the Nielsen rat-ings, as film industry executives have been guided by the dissection of box office receipts. However, ratings and receipts are both retrospective measures— and simple ones at that. In contrast, Netflix used its vast data resources and complex algorithms to make forward- looking pre-dictions about audience reactions, like IBM Watson with the cognitive computing project.

This is just one anecdote, of course, but the code- focused ap-proach Netflix has taken to movie- moguling and TV producing has yielded broadly impressive results, including breakout hits like House

205



Authenticity 205

of Cards, Orange Is the New Black, and Unbreakable Kimmy Schmidt. Due in large part to its industry- leading focus on data and algorithms, Netflix has gone from a company that was widely judged to be on the brink of failure after a pricing mistake four years ago that sparked large- scale user defection to one that is to the business of streaming media what Alibaba and Amazon are to electronic commerce. In 2015, after years of steady growth, Netflix accounted for almost 37 percent of all downstream Internet traffic in North America during peak eve-ning hours.6

Does this mean that Netflix is a company run entirely by algorithms in which human intuition and insight play no part? “It is important to know which data to ignore,” Netflix chief content officer Ted Sarandos noted to Wu. “In practice, it’s probably a seventy- thirty mix, [where] seventy is the data, and thirty is judgment. But the thirty needs to be on top, if that makes sense.”

When it comes to various jobs’ susceptibility to automation, movie mogul would still have to rank close to the bottom. The combination of cultural sensibility, financial acumen, negotiating savvy, and personal charisma required for success as a film industry executive would be difficult to duplicate. Yet anyone who has used a driving app such as Google Maps to guide the process of urban navigation knows what Sarandos is talking about. Augmenting human decision- making with automated input— the advent of Big Data or what IBM calls cog-nitive computing— is not a future possibility but a present reality. Furthermore, it is limited neither to experts nor to narrowly technical domains and is being applied in a broad range of human endeavors, from cooking and film production to public health, urban planning, disaster response, and environmental management.

“Never before has it been possible to self- consciously design and test at scale new forms of social technologies with rapid iterations and inno-vation,” John Clippinger wrote in his contribution to the informatively titled From Bitcoin to Burning Man and Beyond: The Quest for Identity and Autonomy in a Digital Society, a 2014 book he coedited with author/ activist David Bollier.7 “The convergence of open platforms, social net-working, Big Data and encryption innovations allows us to address many social and economic problems that simply could not be seen or addressed under the regnant system of authoritative institutions.”8

206



206 The Human Advantage

Clippinger has been thinking and writing about human societies as cy-bernetic systems for 40 years. Most recently he started the Institute for Innovation & Data Driven Design, a nonprofit organization formed to develop, and to field test, legal- and software- based “trust frameworks” for data- driven services, infrastructures, and enterprises. Core to this work is the use of an authentication and verification system known as the Blockchain, which allows for the irreversible and open documenta-tion of verified transactions of any type.

The era of cognitive computing is clearly upon us. Social systems are already man- machine systems. Whether this next stage in the advance of code is desirable is a less interesting question than how to make it as broadly beneficial as possible. Who does the work in the era of cog-nitive computing? Who gets the credit? Who earns the reward? Who owns the data …

… and, when all is said and done, who gets to decide if computer- generated poutine is real poutine?

The Comité Interprofessionnel du vin de Champagne is an organi-zation dedicated exclusively to ensuring the authenticity of wines sold under the name “champagne.” For a bottle of sparkling wine to be so branded, it must be produced not only in the Champagne region of France but also according to a specific set of processes, including the choice of grape varietals, care of vines, and actual production of the champagne. Like Swiss watchmakers in their market, the producers of authentic champagnes comprise a relatively small share, about 13 per-cent, of the sparkling wines sold globally. However, with $2.4 billion in export sales in 2014, they constitute more than 50 percent of the global export market for sparkling wine.

Most French wines and an array of other agricultural products are produced in accordance with regulations established by the Institut National de l’Origine et de la Qualité, a government organization formed in 1935 that functions as a sort of modern- day guild.9 The Institut National ensures quality and restricts output in order to main-tain the integrity of brands and protect producers’ livelihoods.

Many other countries have similar entities, each with its own meth-ods of authenticating culinary products by ensuring compliance with production standards. In Thailand, the government has recently taken

207



Authenticity 207

such work to a new level with its introduction of a tasting robot de-signed for a single task: authenticating Thai dishes. A box the size of an old- style television set, the “e- delicious” machine scans samples of supposed “Thai food” and compares the chemical composition of the samples against the known chemical signatures of authentic dishes. The government entity that created the machine, the Thai Delicious Committee, is taking additional action to ensure the authenticity of Thai food, including offering a logo that restaurants can affix to their menus if they use government- sanctioned recipes.

Given that sales of food and beverages constitute between one- sixth and one- fifth of global economic exchange, these attempts to ensure the authenticity of culinary code are of inherent importance in under-standing the code economy in past, present, and (likely) future forms. However, they also underscore the fundamental relationship between algorithms of production and protocols for authentication and verifica-tion, such as Blockchain.

The analogy between monetary and culinary protocols for authenti-cation and verification is illustrated further by considering the personal history of one of history’s greatest creators of new concoctions: Sir Isaac Newton.

What do I mean by this? Well, Isaac Newton is renowned for his inven-tion of calculus (simultaneously with Gottfried Leibniz). And, as I noted in chapter 12, Newton served for more than two decades as the Master of the Royal Mint, during which time he oversaw the introduction of common currency for the new Kingdom of Great Britain. However, during the course of Newton’s lifetime, he also wrote over a million words of notes on alchemy, of which he published none. These notes detailed his extensive and exhaustive attempts to find a recipe for gold, using base metals as inputs. Newton’s mentors and peers who shared his passion for alchemy included the great natural scientist Robert Boyle (known to chemistry students everywhere via Boyle’s Law) and philosopher John Locke, whose essays on cognition and political freedom inspired Jean- Jacques Rousseau and helped spark the American Revolution.10

Acting like human versions of Watson in their search for a recipe for gold, Newton, Boyle, Locke, and a vast pan- European guild of al-chemists tried thousands of different combinations of ingredients, sub-jected to a panoply of preparations, all the while taking scrupulous

208



208 The Human Advantage

notes on the conjectured composition of the base metals they used as ingredients and the results they observed. Lacking any real understand-ing of chemistry, they could only observe raw correlations and seek pat-terns that seemed to promise a solution in machine- learning fashion.

True, Newton and his contemporaries failed utterly in their quest to create gold. However, they did contribute significantly to what has turned out to be a far greater project: the discovery of the algorithms of structured inquiry into the nature of the world that they termed “natu-ral philosophy,” which we refer to today simply as “science.”11

On October 31, 2008, Satoshi Nakamoto— who may or may not exist— posted a nine- page paper to the “metzdowd.com” cryptogra-phy mailing list, which was titled “Bitcoin: A Peer- to- Peer Electronic Cash System.” The paper proposed “a system for electronic transac-tions without relying on trust.” Its publication was timely. Six weeks earlier, Lehman Brothers Holdings, Inc., the fourth- largest U.S. invest-ment bank, had sought Chapter 11 protection, thus initiating the single biggest bankruptcy proceeding in U.S. history. Trust in the financial system was as low as it had been for decades, as experts and members of the general public alike asked, “How can the global financial system be made more transparent and less subject to systemic distortions?” By offering an architecture for the issuance of currency and the docu-mentation of transactions that is based on code rather than individual discretion, Bitcoin provided at least one possibility.

Is Bitcoin really money? The best approach to answering this question begins with insights from William Stanley Jevons, cofounder of the neo-classical school in economics and pioneering inventor in the field of arti-ficial intelligence, to whom I referred in chapter six. Jevons set forth the basic parameters for contemporary understanding of money in a mono-graph published in 1875, titled Money and the Mechanism of Exchange.

“To decide upon the best material for money is thus a problem of great complexity,” Jevons wrote, “because we must take into account at once the relative importance of the several functions of money, the degree in which money is employed for each function, and the impor-tance of each of the physical qualities of the substance with respect to each function.”12 Jevons organized the desirable properties of a material functioning as money along seven dimensions: “(1) Utility and value;

209



Authenticity 209

(2) Portability; (3) Indestructibility; (4) Homogeneity; (5) Divisibility; (6) Stability of value; (7) Cognizability.” To validate his framework, Jevons used it to explain the historical dominance of gold as a medium of exchange. Gold has intrinsic appeal, Jevons noted; it is permanently lustrous and possesses “a rich and brilliant yellow colour, which can only be adequately described as golden.” It is easy to carry, it can be subdivided without difficulty, it is scarce and thus relatively stable in value, and, perhaps most importantly, it can be readily recognized due to its exceptional density. Jevons stated that, for these reasons, when it comes to money gold is, well, the gold standard.

Given the supremacy of gold as a medium of exchange, it was only natural that, when national governments began to issue paper currency in the nineteenth century, they sought to tie the value of their currency to gold. The emergence of a gold standard— first in the Commonwealth countries and then in the United States and other leading European nations— contributed to the dramatic growth in global trade that oc-curred toward the end of the nineteenth and the beginning of the twen-tieth century. The outbreak of World War I brought that first era of glo-balization to a sudden halt, and with it the beginning of the end of the gold standard. For the past 40 years the world’s currencies have been untethered from gold or any other metal. National “fiat” currencies are nothing more or less than tradable trust, whose function as currency is based entirely on government- enforced scarcity and verifiability not tethered to its intrinsic usefulness.

Bitcoin— a digital currency created and exchanged on the Blockchain platform— satisfies all the criteria for being “money” that William Stanley Jevons set forth more than a century ago, with one excep-tion: intrinsic utility and value. That does not mean that that Bitcoin will grow in significance as a means of exchange, much less achieve any position of dominance. But with digital transactions via mobile phones— Apple Pay and the like— becoming ever more common and the concept of a digital currency not backed by any government gain-ing rapid acceptance, the prospect of one or another digital currency competing successfully with fiat currencies is not nearly as far- fetched today as it was even three years ago.

Sixty- four days after publication of the Bitcoin protocol, the system was operational. The first solution to the progressively more difficult

210



210 The Human Advantage

algorithm described in Nakamoto’s paper was discovered, which is the same as saying that Bitcoin number 1 had been “mined.” In the six years that followed the creation of Bitcoin, it traced out the full trajectory of the Gartner Hype Cycle: from early obscurity to “the peak of inflated expec-tations” as the price of Bitcoin surged in 2011 and again in 2013, and sub-sequently to “the trough of disillusionment” as adoption remained slow.

Through these stages, some bullish pundits proclaimed Bitcoin’s ascendancy as a global currency imminent and the displacement of the world’s central banks correspondingly inevitable. Others decried Bitcoin as being suited only to money laundering and the facilitation of illicit transactions and argued that it would never develop into a viable commercial platform. Yet while the volatile public discussion of Bitcoin has focused on the viability and desirability of a digital currency not backed by any government, a bigger story has been hidden in plain sight all along: the creation of “a system for electronic transactions without relying on trust” that the person (or persons) named Satoshi Nakamoto described in a technical note published one Halloween night more than seven years ago. That system is the Blockchain.

To understand the Blockchain, consider anew the image of Bob Cratchit laboring over his desk in A Christmas Carol, making calcula-tions and entering them into a ledger. That ledger constituted the au-thoritative record of the business of Ebenezer Scrooge and Company. Each transaction fit into a horizontal block— a row in the ledger— and the entire ledger thus constituted a chain of such blocks, each one de-pendent on the accuracy of the one before. In other words, a ledger is a block chain.

The Blockchain that underlies Bitcoin is also a ledger. However, it is a ledger with two special properties. First, it is a “distributed” ledger. Rather than being validated by a lone “Bob Cratchit” working in obscurity— or, in more contemporary form, an army of auditors from PriceWaterhouseCoopers— the Blockchain is a ledger that is validated by thousands of strangers, all of whom perform their own calculations to ensure that a given block in the chain is accurate and authentic. What Wikipedia has accomplished for knowledge, Blockchain thus promises to accomplish for transactions: returning validation authority to users. And just as Wikipedia put an end to the dominance of Encyclopaedia

211



Authenticity 211

Brittanica, Blockchain has the potential to put an end to the domi-nance of central banks, university registrars, land title companies, and any other third- party validators of transactions, credentials, or claims.

The second special property of the Blockchain, which follows di-rectly from the first, is that once a block in the Blockchain has been val-idated, it stays validated forever. In other words, unlike physical ledgers that can be doctored or altered, the Blockchain is immutable. How? Simply because— due to its digital rather than paper- based nature— the Blockchain exists in many places at once. Any attempt to tamper with one copy of the Blockchain would be invalidated by the abundance of copies that collectively affirmed the authoritative version. To attempt to tamper with blocks in the Blockchain is a task of comparable (or, for technical reasons, even greater) difficulty than trying to get the world to accept as legitimate a new version of Hamlet or a modified version of the Beatles song “Yesterday.” So many authoritative copies exist that a fraud is easily unmasked.

Thus the Blockchain is not just any ledger. It is an example of a dis-tributed, immutable ledger.

The very existence of the Blockchain brings to the foreground an es-sential dimension of code economics that I have only briefly alluded to: authenticity and verification. We judge the authenticity of a coin from the imprint it bears, from its weight, and (with some work) from its phys-ical composition. We judge the authenticity of paper currency from the engraving it bears, including difficult- to- reproduce watermarks and mi-croprinted characters. But how do we judge the authenticity of a digital payment— be it a digital dollar bill or a Bitcoin? Or, in a complex ano-nymized world, of a bottle of wine? A work of art? Even an experience?

The problem the Blockchain solves is as old as monetized ex-change: how to verify that that a person, an object, or a claim is what it represents itself to be. Without such verification, it is impossible to establish rights over property and rules over contracts; without rights over property and rules over contracts, it is impossible to structure a market system of exchange.

Nearly all economic analysis takes the existence of rights over prop-erty and rules over contracts as a given and focuses on the nature and consequences of market exchange. The advent of the Blockchain (sub-suming within it the applications of Blockchain code such as Bitcoin)

212



212 The Human Advantage

surfaces the fact that markets depend on platforms for exchange, which in turn rely on protocols of authentication and verification.

It turns out that the immutability of the Blockchain makes it a pow-erful tool for authentication and verification— and, potentially, a next phase in the advance of code.

So far, the Blockchain applications that have drawn the greatest atten-tion have been in financial services— taking a cue from, though going well beyond, the precedent set by Bitcoin. However, the applications of Blockchain that ultimately may have the greatest direct impact on the human experience are likely to be those related to the (self- )governance of peer- to- peer networks.

By their very structure, peer- to- peer platforms start out being dis-tributed. The challenge is how to organize all of the energy contained in such networks so that people are rewarded fairly for their contributions. This is a problem that in the past has been solved either by impersonal markets (which do a bad job of keeping track of reputation) and cen-tralized administrative authority (which does a bad job of rewarding contribution). Blockchain- based systems for governing peer- to- peer networks hold the promise— so far unrealized— of incorporating the best features of markets when it comes to rewarding contributions, and of organizations when it comes to keeping track of reputations.

If designed as Robin Chase, Lisa Gansky, John Clippinger, and others believe they can be, peer- to- peer systems have the potential to scale- out the value created on peer- to- peer platforms to reach the tens of thousands, even hundreds of thousands, of people who contribute to them. Moreover, they will create new and enticing invitations to latent producers within the economy to employ their individual assets and talents to create new economic value. Dynamically negotiated “smart contracts” on the Blockchain and other peer- to- peer innovations hold the promise of realizing Jevons’ long- ago articulated vision of “a more useful and beneficial form of organization” based on profit- sharing, which I discussed in chapter 6.

The significance of peer- to- peer business models thus is not effec-tively measured by adding up the current share of GDP they represent in terms of monetized transactions. These innovations in work are rushing in at the fringes of the advanced economies to fill the void left behind as

213



Authenticity 213

large corporations continue to “lean up”— that is, to shrink their pay-rolls by employing algorithms and machines to perform routine tasks previously performed by people. Steven Straus, former managing direc-tor of the Center for Economic Transformation at the New York City Economic Development Corporation, looks at the same phenomenon from the standpoint of job seekers: “We currently have about three job seekers for every available job and 11 million people looking for work— so the growth of the sharing economy isn’t surprising.”13

In the coming decades, the United States and other advanced in-dustrialized economies will no sooner return to the routinized manufacturing- centric economy of the twentieth century than to the agrarian economy that preceded it. The issue is not whether new liveli-hoods based on peer- to- peer business models are better or worse than the Industrial Age jobs that are disappearing from large corporations, but whether, when jobs are eliminated in the process of digital dis-ruption, they will be coming back in their old form— or not. As that happens, we humans have no choice but to fall back on our most fun-damental social skills: creating and sharing with one another. There is, however, one big difference: unlike our isolated ancestors of millennia past, Americans and people everywhere in this century are empowered by architectures of collaboration that allow for the creation of new and diverse livelihoods at an unprecedented rate.

In her book Peers Inc., Robin Chase draws from well- considered analysis, as well as her own personal experience as the cofounder of the car- sharing company Zipcar, to differentiate between the “Peers” and “Inc.”— the crowd that creates value, and the platforms on which that value creation takes place. In a chapter fitingly titled “Who Has the Gold?” she makes the following observation: “Peers Inc. thrives when peers are motivated to contribute. Platforms that do not adequately reward peers, value their contribution, and invest in their potential, will fail in the long term.”14

Therein lies the potential of today’s peer- to- peer economy. However, the existence of peer- to- peer networks alone is not sufficient to ensure inclusion and equity. Because “he who enrolls, controls,” another re-quirement for inclusion and equity may be that the networks are based on systems of trust and verification that are not wholly owned by dis-interested third parties.

214



214 The Human Advantage

“Man is born free and everywhere he is in chains.” This powerful opening sentence from Jean- Jacques Rousseau’s The Social Contract en-capsulates the fundamental paradox of the advance of code, and the progress of human society.

Echoing Rousseau, I noted at the outset of this book that the ad-vance of code over the past four or five centuries has involved the col-lective willingness of human beings to cede to other people, and to code itself, authority and autonomy that we for millennia kept unto our-selves and our immediate tribal groups. This individual autonomy has allowed humanity’s greatest inventions to emerge and propagate: cities, global trade, the rule of law, science, and democracy. That these great-est inventions are all social inventions is not surprising, for humans are deeply social beings. Progress in human society can be thought of as the evolution of chains, from those of subjugation and servitude to those of collaboration and interconnection. At every stage, the process has been enabled by the advance of code.

Earlier in the book I alluded to the significant advances in de-mocracy, science, and financial systems that occurred simultaneously during the interval of history during which Rousseau, the Genevan watchmaker’s son, wrote his great works of political and natural philos-ophy: the Age of Enlightenment. That systems of governance, inquiry, and economics should have advanced all at the same time— fueled by coffeehouse discussions in just a handful of cities— is no coincidence at all. Each of these foundational developments in human social evolu-tion is, at its core, an algorithm for authentication and verification. The scientific method, democratic processes, and financial system protocols all serve to reduce the arbitrary power of single individuals— whether to rule, to establish facts, or to validate transactions— while simultane-ously enhancing the collective capacity of groups. Each is an instance of an underlying phenomenon, which is the advance of code.

That political, scientific, and economic manifestations of the ad-vance of code are fundamentally linked is reflected in the simple his-torical fact that many of the same people were responsible for paral-lel and linked advances in modern democratic forms of government, scientific methods, and the architecture of modern financial systems. As I mentioned, Newton, Leibniz, Locke, Boyle, Rousseau, and an array of colleagues whose names are now mostly lost to history, each

215



Authenticity 215

contributed substantially to the conceptualization and in some cases the implementation of some of the institutional innovations that have shaped the modern world.

The patterns connecting systems of authentication and verification in politics, science, and economics continued into the nineteenth cen-tury, as embodied in figures as diverse as David Ricardo, Lord Byron, Charles Babbage, Ada Lovelace, Henry George, and William Jevons.

It is only because of the disciplinary fragmentation of inquiry that has occurred in the past century that we do not immediately perceive in the evolved historical record the patterns connecting systems of au-thentication and verification in politics, science, and economics as they have jointly evolved. Those patterns exist, but it takes some work to find them. Illuminating those patterns has been the point of this book.

The underlying unity of the advance of code along multiple frontiers is evident today in the work and writings of Jim Bessen, Robin Chase, John Clippinger, Vint Cerf, Lisa Gansky, Jaron Lanier, Tim O’Reilly, David Nordfors, and many others whose perspectives on the code econ-omy I have shared in this book, or who have in other ways informed the patterns I have sought to illuminate. A significant number in this group considers self- governing protocols for authentication and verifi-cation to be an essential element of an inclusive and democratic digital future. The conviction these well- informed observers share regarding the importance of building self- governance into the architecture of the code economy is based in part on their concern about the potentially negative consequences of the concentration of data and the centraliza-tion of third- party powers of authentication and verification.

However, the development of new institutional mechanisms for en-suring authenticity does not preclude the use of old ones. If 40,000 years of the history of code is any indication, algorithmic improvements will shift the domains in which human judgment will be valuable but will not diminish its importance. What each of us believes to be authentic will de-termine what each of us believes to be valuable. These decentralized, in-dividual determinations of value will shape the evolution of the economy and, to a significant extent, the development of human society.15



Q 14



Purpose

The Promised Sand



No idea can substitute for immediate experience.

— Burning Man Principle No. 10



On a recent September evening, a traffic jam of epic proportions formed on a dry lakebed in the Nevada desert. Cars, vans, motorcycles, campers, mechanical Mastodons, cruise- ships- on- wheels, and vehicles of a variety not present anywhere else on the planet formed a line five lanes wide and ten miles long. This procession crawled forward along the flat, cracked clay at a speed barely exceeding two miles per hour.

Just a day earlier, the vehicles’ occupants had comprised the citizenry of a city of 70,000 people— the fourth largest in the State of Nevada. A bike repair shop had buzzed with activity as eager apprentices worked alongside experienced mechanics. Kids had played putt- putt golf. Impromptu restaurants had dispensed grilled- cheese sandwiches, waffles, and beignets by the hundreds. The city had literally pulsed with music, dance, and art for the full seven days of its existence.

Yet for all the evident energy and creativity of its citizens, the city had been an abject failure from the standpoint of conventional eco-nomic metrics. With an economy based on gifts rather than monetized trade, its contribution to gross domestic product was close to zero. Its endowment of natural resources was similarly nonexistent. According to standard definitions, unemployment was close to 100 percent.

Black Rock City, as this place was known, had been as rich in experi-ences and as poor in natural resources as any other. When its time came

216

217



Purpose 217

to an end, its citizens dispersed throughout the long night in ritual solemnity.

The Esplanade is to Black Rock City what the Bund is to Shanghai or the Quai d’Orsay to Paris: where you stand to gaze out at the illuminated tableau of an urban landscape. However, unlike these other famed front-ages, the Esplanade does not offer views of cathedrals, castles, or bridges. Instead it offers a view of a black expanse traversed by moving lights and bursts of flame so intense and numerous that they merge almost seam-lessly into the starscape above. Over the entire scene presides The Man: a colossal wooden stick figure situated at dead center of the semicircular grid of streets that comprise the layout of Black Rock City (see figure 14.1).





FIGURE 14.1 Map of Black Rock City. Satellite image of Black Rock City, taken from NASA World Wind. Personal creation from NASA World Wind program, zoomed in and centered on Black Rock City. Whole “city” represented to avoid confusion.

Source: NASA.

218



218 The Human Advantage

This is Burning Man: a temporary city with a population of 70,000— about the size of the Mesopotamian city of Uruk that I discussed in chapter 2— that exists in the Nevada desert for one week every year.

“I’ve always been very interested in scenes, particularly avant- garde scenes,” said Larry Harvey, the founder of Burning Man, when we spoke at Black Rock City in September 2015. Avant- garde scenes, he said, act as “a crossroads for people doing radical things seeming unre-lated to one another. People start to meet one another, and bounce off one another, and share ideas with one another. That could be the Beats in America. That could be the Bloomsbury Group in London. It could be older scenes even before that, around folks going back since forever. We are that.” Harvey then paused, not for effect but for reflection. “Except we’re the first organization, I believe, that turned a Bohemian scene into a city,” he continued. “I don’t think anyone’s ever done that. So now it’s a scene with 70,000 people. Usually scenes don’t do that.”

Like any city, Black Rock City has cultural norms and expectations. What is distinct about Black Rock City is that it offers those experiences on a platform that is, by design, as minimal as possible. Rather than a “festival” in any standard sense of the word, it is an ongoing social experiment in which a petri dish the size of downtown San Francisco is treated with a microbial growth medium that comes in the form of 10 principles and a semicircular urban plan (see Text Box 14.1). A func-tioning city emerges: Artists experiment. Engineers create. (The light design in the basement of the National Gallery of Art in Washington, D.C., is one of a number of Burning Man experiments that has found its way into the world at large.)

But it didn’t start out this way. “One day in 1986 I called a friend and said, let’s build a man and burn him on the beach,” Harvey re-called in one of the countless talks and interviews he has given on the origins of the city. “I did this on impulse. There was really nothing on my mind. I’ve thought about it over the years, because [people] keep asking, and the best I can say is that some passionate prompting, some immediate vision just had to be embodied in the world.” The original burning of The Man on Baker Beach in San Francisco was more of an elaborate and inspired prank than it was a conscious effort to launch a social movement— much less to create a city. “We built our man from scraps of wood, then called some friends and took it to the beach. We

219



Purpose 219



Text Box 14.1 Ten Principles of Burning Man

Burning Man cofounder Larry Harvey wrote these Ten Principles in

2004 as guidelines for the regional network that the organization was

forming at that time. They are described by the Burning Man organi-

zation as having been “crafted not as a dictate of how people should be

and act, but as a reflection of the community’s ethos and culture as it

had organically developed since the event’s inception” in 1986.1

Radical Inclusion

Anyone may be a part of Burning Man. We welcome and respect the

stranger. No prerequisites exist for participation in our community.

Gifting

Burning Man is devoted to acts of gift giving. The value of a gift is

unconditional. Gifting does not contemplate a return or an exchange

for something of equal value.

Decommodification

In order to preserve the spirit of gifting, our community seeks to

create social environments that are unmediated by commercial spon-

sorships, transactions, or advertising. We stand ready to protect our

culture from such exploitation. We resist the substitution of con-

sumption for participatory experience.

Radical Self- reliance

Burning Man encourages the individual to discover, exercise, and

rely on his or her inner resources.

Radical Self- expression

Radical self- expression arises from the unique gifts of the individual.

No one other than the individual or a collaborating group can deter-

mine its content. It is offered as a gift to others. In this spirit, the

giver should respect the rights and liberties of the recipient.

Communal Effort

Our community values creative cooperation and collaboration. We

strive to produce, promote, and protect social networks, public

spaces, works of art, and methods of communication that support

such interaction.

220



220 The Human Advantage



Civic Responsibility

We value civil society. Community members who organize events

should assume responsibility for public welfare and endeavor to

communicate civic responsibilities to participants. They must also

assume responsibility for conducting events in accordance with local,

state, and federal laws.

Leaving No Trace

Our community respects the environment. We are committed to

leaving no physical trace of our activities wherever we gather. We

clean up after ourselves and endeavor, whenever possible, to leave

such places in a better state than we found them.

Participation

Our community is committed to a radically participatory ethic. We

believe that transformative change, whether in the individual or in

society, can occur only through the medium of deeply personal par-

ticipation. We achieve being through doing. Everyone is invited to

work. Everyone is invited to play. We make the world real through

actions that open the heart.

Immediacy

Immediate experience is, in many ways, the most important touch-

stone of value in our culture. We seek to overcome barriers that stand

between us and a recognition of our inner selves, the reality of those

around us, participation in society, and contact with a natural world

exceeding human powers. No idea can substitute for this experience.



saturated it with gasoline and put a match to it, and within minutes our numbers doubled. That’s actually when Burning Man began as an institution. We were so moved by that, we knew we had to do it again.”

After four years at Baker Beach, the gathering began to run into the sort of problems to be expected when a large- scale outpouring of anarchic expression takes place in a major metropolitan area. So Larry Harvey and a group of cofounders who by then had taken responsibil-ity for the gathering decided to find another location.

221



Purpose 221

They settled on the Black Rock Desert, an arid expanse whose utter desolation is accounted for accurately by the U.S. Interior Department’s Bureau of Land Management: “The environment … contains no true soils; surface or ground water; vegetation; wildlife; threatened or en-dangered species; wild horses; paleontology; solid or hazardous waste materials; wilderness; or cultural resources … In addition, the follow-ing critical resources are not present: Areas of Critical Environmental Concern, prime or unique farmland, floodplain, wetlands, or noxious weed.”2 It is an environment that can only be described satisfactorily in the negative— by what it does not contain for the 51 weeks per year it is not home to Black Rock City.

For its first six years, according to one early participant, Burning Man consisted of “a few thousand jackasses going [crazy] across the desert floor … People were driving around shooting guns out of moving cars while dragging their friends from the bumper on tarps.” In 1992 the event became ticketed, with the price of admission set at $25. (In 2016 it was $390.) The city’s volunteer patrol, the Black Rock Rangers, came into existence the same year. That era of unrepressed and ungoverned mayhem flamed out in 1996, when one reveler drove through an occupied tent in the middle of the night, severely injur-ing all inside. The same year another participant on a motorcycle lost a game of chicken with a pickup truck, with fatal consequences. “We decided to build a vessel to contain the community. We realized we had to create a real city.”

When Burners (as Burning Man participants call themselves) re-turned the following year, they found a city plan had been imposed. All tents and RVs were confined to a semicircular grid of streets on which speed limits would be carefully enforced. Black Rock City thus was born.

Like everything about Black Rock City, the layout is the product of both planning and evolution. 3 Cities are what physicists refer to as dissipative structures: highly complex organisms whose existence de-pends on a constant throughput of energy. If you were to close down all bridges and tunnels into New York City or similarly cut off any other city, grocery stores would have only a three- day supply of food. 4 The same is generally true of a city’s other energy requirements. All cities are temporary, and they survive only because we feed them.

222



222 The Human Advantage

In that sense, the explicitly— indeed, contractually— temporary nature of Black Rock City reveals a fundamental truth about all cities. The evolu-tion of Black Rock is for urbanists what a real- life Jurassic Park would be for a paleontologist. We really have no idea what the experience of living in humanity’s first cities might have been— whether Uruk in Mesopotamia or Çatalhöyük in Anatolia. And yet all cities also have elements of plan-ning. Where Black Rock City has its Larry Harvey, London had its Robert Hooke and Washington, D.C., had its Pierre L’Enfant. Each had a notion of how to bound a space, build symmetry and flow, and in so doing pro-vide a platform where the human experience can unfold.

“Human culture— as distinct from social institutions that surround it— is a pure phenomenon of nature. Social institutions have the power to protect it and sustain it, much as any vessel— a petri dish or ceramic pot— might help or hinder the growth of any living thing,” Harvey has observed. “But the innate vitality of culture belongs to the world of nature; it occurs spontaneously, it is without a plan, and when it is allowed to grow it has a power to affect our world in ways that dwarf our normal estimate of our resources.”5

To the denizens of Black Rock City, all that lies outside the city walls (actually, the trash fence that defines the perimeter of the space where Burning Man takes place) is known as “default world.” In default world’s getaway destinations— hotels and motels— the two items one can count on getting for free are ice and coffee. At Black Rock City, the exact opposite holds: the only two items available for purchase are ice and coffee. The irony is instructive, as the economy of Black Rock City is more or less the exact inverse of the default world economy.

“We allow no vending, no advertising, no buying or selling of any-thing,” says Harvey. “We discourage bartering because even bartering is a commodity transaction. Instead, we’ve originated both an ethos and an economic system that is devoted to the giving of gifts. This is a radical departure from the marketplace that we’re accustomed to, because, of course, the marketplace invades every crack and corner of our lives today. A gift economy is founded on principles that are dia-metrically different from those that dominate our consumer culture.”6

Yet Harvey draws an important distinction between what occurs within the “container” that is Black Rock City and the manner in which the city interacts with the environment outside. “There’s this notion

223



Purpose 223

that this is a moneyless utopia,” he observed to a group of journalists gathered at Black Rock City in 2015. “Where did all this stuff come from? It was purchased in the marketplace. Where did this tent come from? It wasn’t cobbled together in this environment that furnishes no material resources whatsoever … Most people didn’t knit their tent from wool, from shearing sheep.” This is the throughput of energy that allows Black Rock City— like any city— to survive.

What differentiates Black Rock City is its all- pervasive culture of par-ticipation. If Burning Man has a rule, it is “no spectators.” As Harvey says of the resources participants transport, at great cost and difficulty, to the Nevada desert: “The crucial question is what happens when they cross the city boundaries and decide what to do with those resources. The meaning isn’t stamped into the goods at the factory or something. The meaning derives from what they do with those goods and how they use those goods to connect with everybody here. That’s the curious nature of the economy at Burning Man.”

Yet even with the singular nature of Black Rock City’s participatory culture, this aspect of the city also generalizes. All cities are fed with resources from the outside, and meaning derives from what citizens do with those goods they draw from the outside— including how they use those goods to connect with others around them.

In Part Three of this book I have focused a lot on games and invented worlds. Given the weighty nature of the questions I am addressing, this may have seemed an odd approach. Are Monopoly and Second Life and Burning Man really the best narrative vehicles for exploring the ad-vance of code? Wouldn’t real- world examples be more illustrative than a focus on games?

Perhaps. But note this: games themselves are code. The purpose of games, as code, is to make the world intelligible by practicing how to exist within it. In this way, the best games represent the models of the world that actually dominate and function effectively at any point in time. Such games are not more real than reality, but they are the ideal lens for understanding how a particular society makes sense of reality. The games people play at a particular point in time represent a pure form of applied economics (see Text Box 14.2). Indeed, generations of economists know the great physicist John von Neumann (see chapter

224



224 The Human Advantage



Text Box 14.2 Yin- Yang

Some years after publishing “De arte combinatoria,” Gottfried

Leibniz came across the I Ching, also known as the “Book of

Changes.” The I Ching is a book of divination in which fundamental

modes of being are structured into 64 hexagrams. Each hexagram

is a figure composed of six stacked horizontal lines ( 爻 yáo), where

each line is either Yin (a broken line with a gap in the center) or Yang

(an unbroken or solid line). Yin and Yang represent masculine and

feminine elements in both Taoism and Confucianism. Expressing

Yin as “0” and Yang as “1” naturally leads to a binary representation,

where three digits, each valued at either zero or one, generate the 64

possibilities in the hexagram.7

Leibniz found some support for his concept of “the Universal

Character,” the first notion of a programming language, in the I

Ching’s representation of the universe in terms of dualities: a series of

yes- no possibilities that could combine to express life and conscious-

ness in its full complexity. Boosted by this insight, Leibniz resumed

work on the binary system. More than a century later, George Boole

picked up this line of work. The result is the Boolean logic that is the

foundation of all digital computing languages today.

Deeply embedded in the binary world is the juxtaposition of Yin

(丨) and Yang (二) that inspired Leibniz three centuries ago. When

combined in much the same manner Leibniz envisioned, the charac-

ters for Yin and Yang form a new character: 丨二.

Its meaning? Humanity.8 Within Confucianism, this character,

written in modern Chinese as 仁 and in Hanyu Pinyin as rén, has a

meaning that extends well beyond the character that might be trans-

lated as “humankind.” It conveys a person’s outward orientation or

altruism. Lacking a precise analogue in English, it is variously trans-

lated as “benevolence,” “virtue,” and “goodness.” Yet none of those

words captures the functional aspect of rén within Confucianism,

which is intended not only as a sentiment but as the origin of

ritual— in short, the code of social order.

As noted above, I have used the stories of Monopoly and Burning

Man to describe the code economy, including both how to help us

understand the code economy as it is now and how it is evolving.

225



Purpose 225



Yet these two models are almost exact opposites: Atlantic City in its

heyday— the inspiration for Monopoly— is nothing like Black Rock

City, and vice versa.

Properly understood, Monopoly and Burning Man represent a

binary pair— a Yin and a Yang of worldviews.

In Monopoly the winner takes all; at Burning Man there is no

winner because there is no winning. In Monopoly the value of land

increases with proximity to the water. At Burning Man … well, it’s

the desert. In Monopoly every exchange is monetized and accumulat-

ing wealth is the goal. At Burning Man no exchange is monetized

and sharing experiences is the goal.

Yet Monopoly and Burning Man have some things in common.

Both are designed spaces in which people can learn about each

other’s aspirations and motivations. Both exist for a finite period of

time, then repeat, following the same rules. Both have inspired the

creation of ritual.

Monopoly was designed to expose the fundamentally competitive

essence of human beings— our desire to own, control, and extract.

Burning Man was designed to provide space for the fundamentally

collaborative essence of human beings— our desire to share, give,

and build together. Yet upon further examination we realize that

each contains the other.

The views of human nature and of the dynamics of society that

Henry George articulated in Progress and Poverty, the inspiration for

Monopoly, harmonize remarkably well with that of his contemporary,

Richard Jefferies, who in turn inspired Burning Man founder Larry

Harvey. In the “Absence of Design in Nature,” Jefferies wrote, “I say

that the entire laboring population— some skilled trades excepted

as not really laboring— is miserably underpaid, not because there is

pressure or scarcity, a trouble, a famine, but from pure selfishness …

Thrift, economy, accumulation of wealth, are inventions. They are

not nature.” 9 According to Jefferies, nature is fundamentally abun-

dant and human society is an extension of nature. Human society is

in turn enriched by the productive power of people.

Humanity is selfish, and it is altruistic. The advance of code

reduces individual power and autonomy while it increases individual

capabilities and freedom.

226



226 The Human Advantage

three) only as the coauthor, with economist Oskar Morgenstern, of The Theory of Games and Economic Behavior. They have no knowledge of his role as leader of the project that developed the first digital com-puter. Much of today’s behavioral and experimental economics traces back to fundamental insights first introduced by von Neumann and Morgenstern in that book on the theory of games.

When it comes to the specific games that convey the core point of this book, perhaps the best example— or, really, counterexample— is The Game of Life, which I discussed at the start of chapter 11. As I noted there, much as Monopoly encodes the political philosophy of Henry George, The Game of Life encodes a fundamental theory in economics known as the “permanent income hypothesis,” which was introduced by Milton Friedman in 1957.

In reality, the premise on which the permanent income hypothesis was based began to fail almost as soon as it was encoded in The Game of Life. In 1966, Paul Armer, a senior scientist at the RAND Corporation, authored a report to the White House titled “Computer Aspects of Technological Change, Automation, and Economic Progress.” The report was a comprehensive study of the relationship between the ad-vance of code and the evolution of work:

Increases in human productivity are to be expected, although the im-

provement will not be uniform. The overall impact of computers and

technological change should result in an even higher rate of growth

in productivity than the economy has enjoyed in recent years. Some

types of jobs will disappear, many will change, and new ones will be

created. Education, government, industry, unions, and individuals

must expect and plan for continuing change, which will become an

increasingly important factor in life. Many individuals will have to

learn and perform two, three, or more different types of work in their

lifetime, and education must be accepted as a continuing, lifelong

process. This will be especially true for people in professional and

technical occupations. Those who are unable to adapt to change will

find life difficult.10

Writing fully a half- century ago, Armer observed, “It used to be that a man could go to school, take a job in a profession or in an industry,

227



Purpose 227

move up in the organization, and do his job well until retirement, draw-ing upon what he was taught in school and on what he learned through experience. In many fields, including business, this is becoming more and more difficult.”11

Armer had an advantage in writing about the advance of code: one scientist whose research contracts he was responsible for monitoring was Herbert Simon, who has appeared frequently in the preceding pages. Having worked closely with Simon and his collaborator Allen Newell, Paul Armer had come to understand and appreciate the deeply transformative power of this new mode of creating and evolving code. He understood as clearly as anyone— even Simon himself— the chal-lenges this transformation would pose to the people in adapting to a rapidly changing world.

Is the answer to the challenges facing workers today to offer more and better education? What would The Game of Life, updated to the twenty- first century, look like?

In most of this book I have focused on the “how” of production and work. But what of the “why?” After all, as John Stuart Mill and John Maynard Keynes foresaw long ago, a solid majority of people on earth today have been liberated from the Malthusian trap of a bare subsistence existence— and that fraction continues to grow rapidly, for reasons I described in my previous book, 12 The Coming Prosperity .

In 1990, a staggeringly high 43 percent of people in the “developing world,” approximately 1.9 billion people, lived in extreme poverty. By 2010 that number had fallen to 21 percent, or 1.2 billion.13 Progress has continued since.

For the past two centuries, the vehicle for that progress has been the continual capacity of economies to generate more and better jobs. Jim Clifton, the CEO of the global polling firm Gallup, is a passionate and well- informed advocate for the need to keep that process going. “Gallup has discovered that having a good job is now the great global dream; it’s the number one social value for everyone,” Clifton wrote in 2011. “This is one of our most powerful findings ever. ‘A good job’ is more important than having a family, more compelling than democ-racy and freedom, religion, peace and so on … Stimulating job growth is the new currency of all leaders because if you don’t deliver on it you

228



228 The Human Advantage

will experience instability, brain drain, sometimes revolution—all of the worst outcomes of failed leadership.”

This is all quite persuasive, and in accordance with the reflexes of politicians around the world. Yet, as another Gallup study released in 2013 indicates, there is more to the story. That study, titled “The State of the Global Workplace,” found that only 13% of employees worldwide are “engaged” at work, while nearly twice that total (26%) are “actively disengaged.” That means that twice as many people globally find their actual jobs to be alienating as find their jobs to be rewarding.

Putting these two Gallup findings together, we appear to be led to the following conclusion: What people around the world desire more than anything— “family … religion, peace, and so on”— is stable work that makes them miserable. When it comes to the idea conveyed by politi-cians almost everywhere that creating “jobs” is society’s number one objective, an observer is tempted to recall the words of Inigo Montoya in the movie The Princess Bride: “You keep using that word. I do not think it means what you think it means.”

So why are so many of the growing majority of people who have escaped the Malthusian trap dissatisfied with their jobs? What are we seeking from our work that “jobs” are, according to Gallup’s results, largely failing to deliver?

According to researcher Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi, the answer is con-tained in one word: flow.

As used by Csikszentmihalyi, “flow” describes an experience of com-plete, intensely focused concentration on the present moment. To ex-perience flow is to experience total immersion and a sense of purpose.

Think of a rock climber scaling the most challenging cliff she has ever encountered. Or a parent fully engaged in playing in a park with their two- year- old child. Or a writer at work in a cafe, when ideas that have swirled around incoherently in his brain for months suddenly seem to appear on the page, as if by their own volition. These are, according to Csikszentmihalyi, experiences of flow.14

To arrive at this definition, Csikszentmihalyi asked hundreds of people to do the following: reflect on an experience that made you truly happy. In that moment, he asked, were you distracted and think-ing about other things, or were you intensely focused on the present moment? Did you feel at once fully in control and unselfconsciously

229



Purpose 229

out of control? Did time seem to slow down or speed up? Did you feel that what you were doing had a purpose?

Csikszentmihalyi’s theory of flow has yet to be validated with hard, neuro- scientific evidence. Indeed, the scientific study of happiness is only in its infancy and we can say little about it with any certainty. But Csikszentmihalyi’s theory has two things going for it. First, it is based on research as solid as any in the scholarly literature on happi-ness. Second, based on the enduring popularity of Csikszentmihalyi’s work, it appears to resonate with people.

Once we start looking for flow, we find it in many places. Take spices, for example. Eating spicy food can be painful for the uniniti-ated and can upset digestion. Spices have little nutritional value and are expensive— indeed, for centuries spices were among the most valuable traded commodities. So why do we eat spices to begin with, much less value them as highly as we do?

Research on this topic suggests that there are at least two evolution-ary reasons for humans to consume spices and to value them highly. The first is that spices seem to have a preservative effect on foods, par-ticularly when employed in combination. Thus the evolutionary value of developing a taste for spices from this standpoint is evident: spices keep us safe.15

The second is very different: using spices provides us with a con-trolled experiment in pain and danger. Much like roller coasters and horror movies, the experience of eating spicy food challenges our body and helps us remain resilient.16

Evidence for this second interpretation comes from work by Paul Rozin, a professor of psychology at the University of Pennsylvania, who for more than four decades has been trying to understand why people like spicy food. In one study, Rozin compared the tolerance of a group of Mexican villagers who were accustomed to spicy food with that of a group of Americans accustomed to a relatively bland diet. After feed-ing each group corn snacks flavored with increasing degrees of chili powder, he asked the research subjects to rank when the taste was opti-mally enjoyable and when it became unbearable.

Not surprisingly, the Mexicans were more tolerant of the spicy food than the Americans. However, for both groups, a very narrow margin separated “just right” and “ouch.” Rozin summarized his

230



230 The Human Advantage

findings for the Wall Street Journal: “The hotness level they [the two groups] liked the most was just below the level of unbearable pain. So that led me to think that the pain itself was involved: They were pushing the limits, and that was part of the phenomenon.”17 Pushing the limits is an essential part of flow, and jobs are generally not de-signed to push the limits. A job may be “nourishing,” but it is not spicy. When work is routine and without challenge, it is not only boring, it is deadening.

Iconoclastic financier turned social theorist Nicholas Taleb, author of Fooled by Randomness and The Black Swan, takes this point further, arguing that performing the same job year after year is not only boring but unhealthy: “The expression in everyday life is: The dose makes the poison. Meaning in a small dose it’s good for you; in a large dose it could kill you or will kill you. We see it constantly. The discoveries about the benefits of alcohol; obviously in small doses it appears wine is good for your heart. In large doses it destroys you.”18 The same, according to Taleb, is true of risk in work. Job security comes at a price, which is the cost of adjustment when the job comes to an end— as it inevitably will. In small amounts it is beneficial. In large amounts it can be deadly.

Whatever one’s preference may be a priori for a long- held secure job, the issue raised by Taleb is, what happens when that long- held secure job is lost? Strong evidence suggests that few experiences are as dev-astating as unemployment following a long period of stable full- time employment.19 Simply put, the longer a person has the same job in the same environment, the less resilient he or she may be when faced with the loss of that job. Like an organism hyperadapted to a particular envi-ronment, long- time employees become unable to cope with a dramatic change in their circumstances.

Shifting metaphors, to seek security and avoid risk in one’s work life is like managing a forest to avoid brush fires. The ultimate result is much more devastating than it would have been to allow a small series of brush fires— in other words, the short- term experience of unemployment or other exposure to volatility in the labor market. “The brush starts to build up— in the natural case— and then when the fire does come, it’s the fire of all fires. It is incredibly destructive.”20 Unintentionally but inevitably, seeking stability ultimately invites catastrophe. Instead of occurring a little at a time, damage occurs all at once.

231



Purpose 231

As Jane Jacobs observed decades ago, what holds for people and forests in this regard also holds for cities. She offers an example of the hazards of efficiency and specialization in the following description of Manchester and Birmingham in the nineteenth century: “Let us begin by examining city inefficiency from the point of view of two English manufacturing cities: Manchester and Birmingham. Back in 1844, a character in one of Disraeli’s novels said ‘Certainly Manchester is the most wonderful city of modern times … Birmingham was just the kind of city that seemed to have been outmoded by Manchester.”21 Just as mid- twentieth- century Detroit specialized in the production of cars and Akron in the produc-tion of tires, so mid- nineteenth- century Manchester specialized in the production of textiles. Then along came the American textile industry, and Manchester eventually lost its core industry while its citizens lost their once secure jobs. The result was a devastation from which it took decades to recover. “Manchester’s efficient specialization [in the produc-tion of textiles] portended stagnation and a profoundly obsolescent city. For the ‘immensity of its future’ proved to consist of immense losses as other people in other places learned how to spin and weave cotton efficiently too.”22 In contrast, Birmingham’s relatively diverse economy proved much more resilient over time. The result, according to Jacobs, was that “Birmingham’s economy has remained alive.”

The same balance between specialization and adaptability that we found to be a necessity for species and industries (see chapter eight) also turns out to be necessary for cities.

Like all platforms in the economy, cities are at once organic and designed, natural and artificial. Understanding how cities resolve the duality between unconscious evolution and planning gets us one step closer to understanding how the economy may have not only structure but purpose.

What economists call capital is really the accumulated artifacts that surround modern humans. Each of these artifacts encodes an intended purpose. Some of these we call infrastructure, others tools, and still others toys. Also among them are computers. Code is always operative, whether in a recipe or in the stove used to prepare it. Each in its own way encodes an idea that enables us to be producers. Thus we are sur-rounded by the realized imaginings of people who came before us.

232



232 The Human Advantage

As Henry George understood clearly nearly a century ago, platforms that draw people to collaborate, share, and experience together are sin-gularly powerful vehicles for the creation of value in society. The ques-tion is now, as it was when George wrote Progress and Poverty, how will that value be shared?

George’s solution was a single tax on land. As economist Peter Orszag has noted, an increased tax on real estate has some logic to it from an equity standpoint. Such a tax could be used to fund the institutional-ization of a society- wide guaranteed minimum income— an idea gener-ally considered entirely impractical only a few years ago that now has a growing number of adherents.

But redistribution constitutes only half of any real solution to the challenges posed by the advance of code— if that. As I have argued throughout this book, we humans are producers at least as much as we are consumers. Due to that fact, it is at least plausible to state that what we seek is not only a guaranteed minimum income but also, and perhaps more importantly, a guaranteed minimum purpose— where by “purpose” I specifically mean the opportunity to connect with others and contribute meaningfully through our work.

In the next round of digital disruption, tasks that can be automated (the “high- volume, low- price” option resulting from ongoing code- driven bifurcations to which I referred in chapter 10) will yield only small dividends for most people. The exception is the relatively small number of people who will maintain the platforms on which such tasks are performed, whose role will be comparable to that of utilities employees and other infrastructure companies in the economy of the twentieth century.

The promising pathway for inclusive well- being is humanized work (the “low- volume, high- price” pathway resulting from ongoing code- driven bifurcations to which I also referred in chapter 10). This path-way includes everything about value creation that is differentiated, personal, and human. It encompasses value created through farm- to- table restaurants, home healthcare services, peer- to- peer coaching, live performances— in short, every task in which there is a human advan-tage. It will be more about shared experiences then impersonal services. If organized on a distributed, immutable, reputation- rich platform such

233



Purpose 233

as the Blockchain, there is every reason to believe that this pathway can provide a broad majority of the population with both guaranteed mini-mum income and guaranteed minimum purpose.

For such activities to reliably create opportunity for people in the future, three conditions must hold:

• There must be no limit to the potential creation and cocreation of

discernibly new experiences.

• There always must be some cost to fully automating new experiences. • It must be easier to create new computers than to create new people.

Combining these conditions allows work to bifurcate endlessly and new processes (which is to say, new work) to persistently earn a profit consistent with a living wage.

The transition to the digital economy is, above all, defined by a shift from the “what” of human productive activity to its “how” and “why.” Many if not most of the greatest opportunities for new work enabled by the advance of digitally enabled code will likely be those most distant from digitally enabled code (see Text Box 14.2).

Jobs that consist of unchanging roles in fixed algorithms within large corporations are disappearing. By economic default as well as by human choice, the future economy is overwhelmingly likely to be dominated not by work that consists of performing routinized tasks but by the capacity to continuously improvise new forms of value— creating for others at the same time we grow our own capacities, and finding new recipes along the way.

Whereas both the classical and neoclassical schools of economics have, for over two centuries, focused on consumption and material scarcity, the actual economy is increasingly driven by production and algorithmic abundance. Why? We human beings do not create only in order to consume. We also create in order to see our potential realized in the world. We create in order to share and connect with others. The history of code is thus also the history of humanity’s cumulative prog-ress in advancing our collective capacity to create.

It turns out that the primary question facing human societies in the face of digital disruption is not whether opportunities for meaningful

234



234 The Human Advantage

work will exist in the future. It is not even how such opportunities for meaningful work will be compensated. The question is more funda-mental: It is about the nature of human productive activity and how we value what we create and share. In other words, it is about what it means to be human.





conclusion Q Identity


A Copernican Moment



At rest, however, in the middle of everything is the sun.

Nicolaus Copernicus, De revolutionibus orbium coelestium, 1543



Neanderthals had bigger brains than Homo sapiens, but the two species were related closely enough that they interbred during the sev-eral thousand years that they coexisted during modern- day Europe’s Upper Paleolithic Era.1 As a result, about 1 percent of the DNA of every living human today derives from our Neanderthal forebears, rather than from our direct Homo sapiens ancestors. From recent sequencing of the Neanderthal genome, we know that Neanderthals had the FOX2 gene, which is associated with language ability, notably including a par-ticular code sequence they uniquely shared with 2 Homo sapiens . Yet de-spite their evolutionary proximity and the advantage of a larger brain, Neanderthals became extinct roughly 40,000 years ago, probably at least in part due to competition with Homo sapiens.

Something other than brain size alone seems to have conferred an advantage on our Homo sapiens ancestors. So what was it?

“Perhaps the most interesting thing about [the Neanderthals] is not what they were but what they failed to become,” observes biologist E. O. Wilson, whose work I cited in chapter one. “Virtually no prog-ress occurred in their technology or culture during their two hundred millennia of existence. No tinkering with tool manufacture, no art, and no personal decoration— at least none exists in the archaeological



235

236



236 The Code Economy

evidence we have so far.”3 In contrast, during the exact interval in which Neanderthal and Homo sapiens overlapped, our direct ancestors proved themselves to be irrepressible tinkerers.

“What catapulted Homo sapiens to this level?” Wilson asks, referring to the birth of code during the Late Paleolithic era, as evidenced by advanced techniques for producing obsidian axes and spear tips, as well as elegant representational cave art, the corralling of animals using con-trolled burns, and the development of complex social rituals indicated by the advent of costumed shamans. “Experts on the subject agree that increased long- term memory, especially that put into working memory, and with it an ability to construct scenarios and plan strategy in brief periods of time, played the key role in Europe and elsewhere.”4 Humans were dramatically better than Neanderthals at creating, storing, modi-fying, and, importantly, sharing code.

Shifting to the present tense, Wilson sums up the human advan-tage: “Humans, it appears, are successful not because of an elevated general intelligence that addresses all challenges but because they are born to be specialists in social skills. By cooperating through the com-munication and the reading of intention, groups accomplish far more than the effort of any one solitary person.”

In the introduction to this book I suggested that the answer to the ques-tion, “Is there anything humans can do better than digital computers?” turns out to be fairly simple: humans are better at being human. What does this mean? To be human is to think critically. To collaborate. To com-municate. To be creative. What we call “the economy” is one extension of these activities. It is the domain in which we develop and advance code.

While focused on the essential qualities that have differentiated the human species over the long term, E. O. Wilson’s observations are valu-able not only in helping us understand our distant past, but also in putting into context our present and immediate future. Consider, for example, the current emphasis among educators on the importance of developing competency in the “4 C’s” that are argued to define twenty- first- century skills: critical thinking, communication, collaboration, and creativity. These skills are precisely the same ones that E. O. Wilson argues were essential for the success of Homo sapiens in our contest with the Neanderthals.

237



Conclusion 237

“Political Economy or Economics is a study of mankind in the or-dinary business of life; it examines that part of individual and social action which is most closely connected with the attainment and with the use of the material requisites of wellbeing,” Alfred Marshall writes at the start of his 1910 masterwork, Principles of Economics, stating the premise that would become the theoretical cornerstone of neoclassical economic theory. But then he goes on to say, “Thus [political economy] is on the one side a study of wealth; and on the other, and more im-portant side, a part of the study of man. For man’s character has been moulded by his every- day work, and the material resources which he thereby procures, more than by any other influence unless it be that of his religious ideals.”5

It is an axiom of the human condition, clearly understood by Alfred Marshall, that we are shaped at least as much by what we create and share in the world— “our every- day work”— as we are by what we consume.

It is for this very reason that the continued advance of code is of such fundamental importance. As Herbert Simon observed in 1965, the year I was born, “The developing capacity of computers to simulate man … will change man’s conception of his own identity as a species.”6 A wave of change that Simon was able to see coming from afar a half- century ago has traversed the open ocean of history and hit human societies with force.

How will we respond? Simon’s own answer is indicated in his belief in the human spirit: “I am confident that man will, as he has in the past, find a new way of describing his place in the universe— a way that will satisfy his needs for dignity and for purpose … But it will be a way as different from the present one as was the Copernican from the Ptolemaic.”7 A previous human generation had to contend with the realization that our planet does not reside at the center of the solar system, much less the universe— the shift from the Ptolemaic to the Copernican worldview to which Simon refers. Generations alive today must contend with a parallel concern: We are not at the center of our cognitive universe. Our own creations are eclipsing us.

For each of us, redefining work requires nothing less than redefining identity. This is because production is not something human beings do

238



238 The Code Economy

just to consume. In fact, the opposite is true. We are living beings. We consume in order to produce. Production is our purpose.

The chains Rousseau referred to constrain us, but they also connect us. They are made of code. Forty- thousand years of human history shaped those bonds. They will not soon slip away.



239



